<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Unknown</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8"/>
    <meta name="DC.Title" content="Unknown"/>
    <style type="text/css">body { margin: 0%;padding: 0%;} .cover { text-align: center;margin-left: 0%;margin-right: 0%;} .coverpage { text-align: center;vertical-align: middle;text-shadow: #000 0px 1px 1px;margin-left: 0px;margin-right: 0px;margin-top: 0px;padding-top: 3em;margin-botton: 3em;font-size: 3.0em;background: #2F4F4F;} .coverimg { margin-top: 0%;margin-left: 0%;margin-right: 0%;width: 100%;} p { margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;} span { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} div { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} p { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} blockquote { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} h1 { text-align: center;} h2 { text-align: center;} h3 { text-align: center;} h4 { text-align: center;} h5 { text-align: center;} h6 { text-align: center;}</style>
  </head>
  <body>
      <h1>Unknown</h1>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 50 — #50
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
50 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
15. Draw a model for the axiomatic system of four-point geometry (Exam-
ple 1.16), where a “line” isa line segment, a “point” isan endpoint of a
line segment, and a point “ison” a line if it isone of itsendpoints.
16. In four-point geometry, use the axioms to explain why every point is on
three diﬀerent lines.
17. In four-point geometry, is it possible for two diﬀerent lines to both pass
through two given distinct points? Explain why or why not using the
axioms.
18. In four-point geometry, do triangles exist? In other words, is it possible
to have three distinct points, not on the same line, such that a line passes
through each pair of points? Why or why not?
19. In four-point geometry, state a good deﬁnition to stipulate what it means
for two linesto intersect.
20. Consider the following model for four-point geometry.
Points:1,2,3,4
Lines: 12, 13, 14, 23, 24, 34
A point “ison” a line if the line’sbox containsthe point.
(a) Give a pair of parallel linesin thismodel. (Refer to Deﬁnition 1.8.)
(b) Give a pair of intersecting linesin thismodel. (Use your deﬁnition
from Exercise 19.)
21. Explain why, in the axiomatic system of Example 1.17, there must be at
least seven distinct bings.
22. Consider the following deﬁnition in the system of Example 1.17.
Deﬁnition. Let x and y be distinct baddas. We say that a bing
q isa boom of x and y,ifx hits q and y hits q.
Rewrite Axiom 3 using this deﬁnition.
23. In the context of Example 1.17, consider the following predicates.
N(x,y)=“xnegationslash= y.”
D(x)=“x isa badda.”
G(x)=“x isa bing.”
H(x,y)=“x hits y.”
Use these predicates to write Axiom 3 in predicate logic.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 51 — #51
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.5 Methodsof Proof 51
24. Refer to Example 1.17 and Figure 1.4. Describe a diﬀerent model, using
squares and vertices, where all the squares are the same size.
25. In the axiomatic system of Example 1.17, let a “badda” be a line segment,
let a “bing” be a point, and say that a line segment “hits” a point if it
passes through it. In the diagram below, there are 4 baddas and 12 bings.
Isthisa model for the system? Which of the axiomsdoesthismodel
satisfy? Explain.
26. Describe a model for Example 1.17 with 10 bings, where a “badda” is a
line segment and a “bing” is a point.
1.5 MethodsofProof
The typesof proofswe did in Section 1.2 were fairly mechanical. We started
with the given and constructed a sequence of conclusions, each justiﬁed by a
deduction rule. We were able to write proofsthisway because our mathematical
system, propositional logic, was fairly small. Most mathematical contexts are
much more complicated; there are more deﬁnitions, more axioms, and more
complex statements to analyze. These more complicated situations do not easily
lend themselves to the kind of structured proof sequences of Section 1.2. In this
section we will look at some of the ways proofs are done in mathematics.
1.5.1 DirectProofs
The structure of a proof sequence in propositional logic is straightforward: in
order to prove A⇒C, we prove a sequence of results.
A⇒B
1
⇒B
2
⇒···⇒B
n
⇒C
A directproof in mathematicshasthe same logic, but we don’t usually write
such proofs as lists of statement and reasons. Instead, this linear chain of im-
plicationsiscouched in mathematical prose and written in paragraph form.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 52 — #52
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
52 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
Example 1.18 The proof of Theorem 1.1 on page 45 isa direct proof. Al-
though thisproof takesthe form of a paragraph, the logical sequence of impli-
cationsiseasy to see.
There are distinct points x, y, and z.
⇒ There isa line l
1
through x and y, and a line l
2
through y and z.
⇒x, y, and z are not on the same line, so l
1
negationslash= l
2
.
These three statements are justiﬁed by Axioms 3, 1, and 4, respectively.
Example 1.19 Prove the following statement.
For all real numbers x,ifx>1, then x
2
> 1.
Proof Let x be a real number, and suppose x>1. Multiplying both sides of
this inequality by a positive number preserves the inequality, so we can multiply
both sides by x to obtain x
2
>x. Since x>1, we have x
2
>x>1, or x
2
> 1,
asrequired. square
It isworth looking back at thisproof. The chain of implicationsisasfollows.
x>1 ⇒ x
2
>x ⇒ x
2
> 1 (1.5.1)
Each conclusion is justiﬁed by an elementary fact from high school algebra, and
the results are packaged in paragraph form. More precisely, the statement we
were proving wasactually a quantiﬁed statement of the form
(∀x)(P(x) →Q(x))
where P(x) means“ x>1” and Q(x) means“ x
2
> 1.” We see that the sequence
of implicationsin Equation (1.5.1) istrue no matter what value we initially
choose for x. Thisisthe meaning of the introductory phrase “Let x be a real
number.” We assume nothing about x other than that it isa real number; it
isarbitrary in every other respect. We then treat P(x) asgiven, and try to
conclude Q(x). Since x could have been any real number to start with, we have
proved the implication for all x.
We state this type of proof as our ﬁrst “Rule of Thumb” for proving theo-
rems.
Rule of Thumb 1.1 To prove a statement of the form (∀x)(P(x) → Q(x)),
begin your proof with a sentence of the form
Let x be [an element of the domain], and suppose P(x).
A direct proof is then a sequence of justiﬁed conclusions culminating in Q(x).</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 53 — #53
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.5 Methodsof Proof 53
Before we look at another example of direct proof, we will need some tools
for dealing with integers. We’ll start with a deﬁnition for what it means for an
integer x to divide another integer y.
Deﬁnition 1.10 An integer x divides an integer y if there issome integer k
such that y = kx.
We write x | y to denote that x divides y. An identical deﬁnition holdsfor
natural numbers (i.e., positive integers). Just replace the three occurrences of
“integer” in Deﬁnition 1.10 with “natural number.”
We are not going to develop a rigorousaxiomatic approach to the integers;
such a treatment is beyond the scope of this course. When you deal with inte-
ger equations, feel free to use elementary facts from high school algebra. You
can add something to both sides of an equation, use the distributive property,
combine terms, and so on. However, there are certain facts about the integers
that we will state as axioms, because they justify important steps in the proofs
that follow.
Axiom 1.1 If a and b are integers, so are a+b and a·b.
Axiom 1.1 describes theclosure property of the integersunder addition and
multiplication. Most number systems are closed under these two operations; you
can’t get a new kind of number by adding or multiplying. On the other hand,
the integers are not closed under division: 2/3 isnot an integer, even though 2
and 3 are.
Example 1.20 Prove the following.
For all integers a, b, and c,ifa|b and a|c, then a| (b+c).
Proof Let integers a, b, and c be given, and suppose a|b and a|c. Then, by
Deﬁnition 1.10, there issome integer k
1
such that b = k
1
a and there issome
integer k
2
such that c = k
2
a. Therefore,
b+c = k
1
a+k
2
a =(k
1
+k
2
)a.
By Axiom 1.1, k
1
+k
2
isan integer, so a| (b+c), again by Deﬁnition 1.10. square
Notice that thisproof illustrateshow deﬁnitionsare used in mathematics.
We used the deﬁnition of “divides” in order to translate the given statement
into an equation, we did some simple algebra on this equation to obtain a new
equation, and we used the deﬁnition again to translate the new equation into
the statement we were trying to prove. Figure 1.5 shows a “ﬂow chart” for this
proof technique.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 54 — #54
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
54 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
Given statement
Algebraic formula
definition
definition
Statement to prove
New algebraic formula
algebra
Figure 1.5 The structure of an algebraic proof.
1.5.2 ProofbyContraposition
Sometimes it is hard to see how to get a direct proof started. If you get stuck
(and you will), try proving the contrapositive. Thisiscertainly permitted, since
the contrapositive of a statement is its logical equivalent. We can state this as
another rule of thumb.
Rule of Thumb 1.2 To prove a statement of the form (∀x)(P(x) → Q(x)),
begin your proof with a sentence of the form
Let x be [an element of the domain], and suppose ¬Q(x).
A proof by contraposition is then a sequence of justiﬁed conclusions culminating
in ¬P(x).
Example 1.21 Suppose x and y are positive real numbers such that the geo-
metric mean
√
xy isdiﬀerent from the arithmetic mean
x+y
2
. Then xnegationslash= y.
Proof (By contraposition.) Let x and y be positive real numbers, and suppose
x = y. Then
√
xy =
√
x
2
since x = y
= x since x ispositive
=
x+x
2
using arithmetic
=
x+y
2
since x = y
square
Contraposition isn’t a radically new proof technique; a proof of a statement
by contraposition is just a direct proof of the statement’s contrapositive. In
Example 1.21, the form of the statement to prove gave a clue that a proof</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 55 — #55
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.5 Methodsof Proof 55
by contraposition would work. If A isthe statement “
√
xy =
x+y
2
” and B is
the statement “x = y,” then the statement to prove has the form ¬A →¬B.
The contrapositive of this statement is B → A, so our proof started with the
assumption that x = y and concluded that
√
xy =
x+y
2
.
For the next example we need some facts from the system of plane geometry
that you studied in high school. Henceforth, we’ll refer to this type of geometry
asEuclidean geometry. The following theorem, which we will not prove, istrue
in Euclidean geometry.
Theorem 1.2 Thesumofthemeasuresoftheanglesofanytriangleequals
180
◦
.
The deﬁnition of parallel that we used in four-point geometry also works in
Euclidean geometry. Although the wording of the following deﬁnition isa little
diﬀerent, the content isfundamentally the same.
Deﬁnition 1.11 Two linesare parallel if they do not intersect.
We’ll use these two statements in the next example.
Example 1.22 Prove:
If two lines are cut by a transversal such that a pair of interior
anglesare supplementary, then the linesare parallel.
A
BC
D
Proof (By contraposition.) Suppose we are given two lines cut by a transversal
as shown above, and suppose the lines are not parallel. Then, by the deﬁnition
of parallel lines, the lines intersect. Without loss of generality, suppose they in-
tersect on the right at point X. (If they intersect on the left, the same argument
will work.)
A
B
X
By Theorem 1.2, the sum of the angles oftriangleXABis180
◦
. Since∠X hasmeasure
greater than 0, the sum of the measures of ∠A and ∠B must be less than 180
◦
,
so ∠A and ∠B can’t be supplementary. square</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 56 — #56
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
56 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
1.5.3 ProofbyContradiction
Sometimes even a simple-looking statement can be hard to prove directly, with
or without contraposition. In this case, it sometimes helps to try a proof by
contradiction. The idea isa little counterintuitive. To prove statement A, sup-
pose its negation ¬A istrue. Then argue, asin a direct proof, until you reach
a statement that you know to be false. You will have established the sequence
¬A⇒B
1
⇒B
2
⇒···⇒B
n
⇒ F
where F represents a statement that is always false, that is, a contradiction.
Taking contrapositivesof thischain givesusa sequence
A⇐¬B
1
⇐¬B
2
⇐···⇐¬B
n
⇐ T
and since T isalwaystrue (i.e., a tautology) it followsthat A istrue also. To
sum up:
Rule of Thumb 1.3 To prove a statement A by contradiction, begin your
proof with the following sentence:
Suppose, to the contrary, that ¬A.
Then argue, asin a direct proof, until you reach a contradiction.
Thisnext example issimilar to Example 1.22. In fact, it isa weaker state-
ment, so the proof given in Example 1.22 could also be used to prove it. But it
makesa nice example of the contradiction method.
Example 1.23 In Euclidean geometry, prove:
If two linesshare a common perpendicular, then the linesare par-
allel.
Before stating the proof, notice that thistheorem isof the following form.
(∀x)(∀y)(C(x,y) →P(x,y))
Here C(x,y) means“ x and y share a common perpendicular,” and P(x,y)
means“ xbardbly.” You can check that the formal negation of thisstatement isthe
following.
(∃x)(∃y)(C(x,y)∧¬P(x,y))
The translation of this last statement is “There exist lines who share a common
perpendicular but are not parallel.” So we use this statement to start our proof
by contradiction.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 57 — #57
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.5 Methodsof Proof 57
Proof (By contradiction.) Suppose, to the contrary, that line AB isa com-
mon perpendicular to lines AC and BD, and also that AC and BD are not
parallel. Then, by Deﬁnition 1.11, AC and BD intersect in some point X.
But then triangleABX hastwo right angles(and a third angle of nonzero measure),
contradicting Theorem 1.2. square
The next results rely on properties of even and odd numbers, so we need
to use these deﬁnitions in our arguments. Recall:
Deﬁnition 1.5. An integer n iseven if n =2k for some integer k.
Deﬁnition 1.6. An integer n isodd if n =2k+1 for some integer k.
As we discussed in Section 1.4.1, these deﬁnitions alone don’t imply that
every integer iseither even or odd. We’ll state thisfact asan axiom.
6
Axiom 1.2 For all integers n, ¬(n iseven) ⇔ (n isodd).
In other words, any integer is either even or odd, but never both. This
axiom isthe key to proving the following lemma.
Lemma 1.1 Let n be an integer. If n
2
iseven, then n iseven.
Proof (By contraposition.) Let n be an integer, and suppose n isnot even.
Then n isodd, by Axiom 1.2. So there issome integer k such that n =2k+1.
Then
n
2
=(2k +1)
2
=4k
2
+4k + 1 = 2(2k
2
+2k)+1
and since (2k
2
+2k) isan integer (by Axiom 1.1), we have shown that n
2
is
odd. By Axiom 1.2, n
2
isnot even, asrequired. square
Our ﬁnal example is a classic proof by contradiction. Recall that arational
number isa number that can be written as a/b, where a and b are integerswith
bnegationslash=0.
Example 1.24 Prove that
√
2 isirrational.
Proof (By contradiction.) Suppose, to the contrary, that
√
2 isrational, so
there are integers a and b such that a/b =
√
2, and a and b can be chosen so that
6. Inamorerigoroustreatmentofnumbertheory,thisfactcouldbeprovedusingthedivision
algorithm, which would follow from the well-ordering principle.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 58 — #58
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
58 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
the fraction a/b is in lowest terms. Then a
2
/b
2
=2,soa
2
=2b
2
, that is, a
2
iseven. By Lemma 1.1, a iseven. Therefore a =2k for some integer k,so
a
2
=4k
2
. But now we have b
2
= a
2
/2=2k
2
,sob
2
iseven, and therefore, by
the lemma again, b iseven aswell. We have shown that a and b are both even,
which contradicts the assumption that a/b is in lowest terms. square
Exercises 1.5
1. Consider the following statement.
For all integers x,if4|x, then x iseven.
(a) Write this statement in predicate logic in the domain of integers.
Say what your predicatesare.
(b) Apply Rule of Thumb 1.1 to write down the ﬁrst sentence of a direct
proof of thisstatement.
(c) Use Deﬁnition 1.10 to translate your supposition in part (b) into
algebra.
(d) Finish the proof of the statement.
2. Give a direct proof:
Let a, b, and c be integers. If a|b and a|c, then a| (b·c).
Remember that you must use the deﬁnition of | in your proof.
3. Prove: Let a, b, and c be integers. If (a·b) |c, then a|c.
4. Give a direct proof.
Let a, b, and c be integers. If a|b and b|c, then a|c.
5. Give a direct proof of the following statement in Euclidean geometry. Cite
any theoremsyou use.
The sum of the measures of the angles of a parallelogram is 360
◦
.
6. Prove:
For all integers n,ifn
2
isodd, then n isodd.
Use a proof by contraposition, as in Lemma 1.1.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 59 — #59
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.5 Methodsof Proof 59
7. Prove the following statement by contraposition.
Let x be an integer. If x
2
+x+ 1 iseven, then x isodd.
Make sure that your proof makes appropriate use of Deﬁnitions 1.5 and 1.6.
8. Prove that the sum of two even integersiseven.
9. Prove that the sum of an even integer and an odd integer is odd.
10. Prove that the sum of two odd integers is even.
11. Write a proof by contradiction of the following.
Let x and y be integers. If x and y satisfy the equation
3x+5y = 153
then at least one of x and y isodd.
12. Prove the following statement in Euclidean geometry. Use a proof by
contradiction.
A triangle cannot have more than one obtuse angle.
13. Let “x notbar y” denote “x doesnot divide y.” Prove by any method.
Let a and b be integers. If 5 notbar ab, then 5 notbar a and 5 notbar b.
14. Consider the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition. An integer n is sane if 3 | (n
2
+2n).
(a) Give a counterexample to the following: All odd integersare sane.
(b) Give a direct proof of the following: If 3 |n, then n issane.
(c) Prove by contradiction: If n =3j + 2 for some integer j, then n is
not sane.
15. Prove that the rational numbersare closed under multiplication. That
is, prove that, if a and b are rational numbers, then a · b isa rational
number.
16. Prove that the rational numbersare closed under addition.
17. Prove: Let x and y be real numbers. If x isrational and y isirrational,
then x·y isirrational.
18. Prove: Let x and y be real numbers. If x isrational and y isirrational,
then x+y isirrational.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 60 — #60
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
60 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
19. Consider the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition. A integer n is frumpable if n
2
+2n isodd.
Prove: All frumpable numbersare odd.
20. Recall the Badda-Bing axiomatic system of Example 1.17. Prove:
If q and r are distinct bings, both of which are hit by baddas
x and y, then x = y.
21. Two common axiomsfor geometry are asfollows. The undeﬁned terms
are “point,” “line,” and “ison.”
1. For every pair of points x and y, there isa unique line such that x
ison l and y ison l.
2. Given a line l and a point x that isnot on l, there isa unique line
m such that x ison m and no point on l isalso on m.
Recall that two lines l and m are parallel if there isno point on both l
and m. In thiscase we write l bardbl m. Use this deﬁnition along with the
above two axiomsto prove the following.
Let l, m, and n be distinct lines. If l bardblm and mbardbln, then l bardbln.
22. The following axiomscharacterize projective geometry. The undeﬁned
termsare “point,” “line,” and “ison.”
1. For every pair of points x and y, there isa unique line such that x
ison l and y ison l.
2. For every pair of lines l and m, there isa point x on both l and m.
3. There are (at least) four distinct points, no three of which are on
the same line.
Prove the following statements in projective geometry.
(a) There are no parallel lines.
(b) For every pair of lines l and m, there isexactly one point x on both
l and m.
(c) There are (at least) four distinct lines such that no point is on three
of them.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 61 — #1
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
Chapter 2
Relational Thinking
Most quantitative problems involve several diﬀerent interrelated objects: mar-
ket forces determine the price of a commodity, steps in a manufacturing process
depend on other steps, virus-infected computers can slow network traﬃc. In or-
dertoanalyzetheserelationships,ithelpstothinkmathematicallyaboutthem.
In this chapter we will explore diﬀerent ways that the elements of a set can
be related to each other or to the elements of another set. These relationships
can be described by mathematical objects such as functions, relations, and
graphs. Our goal is to develop the ability to see mathematical relationships
between objects, which in turn will enable us to apply tools from discrete
mathematics.
Figure 2.1 A computer’s circuit board contains an intricate system of math-
ematical relationships. Concepts such as connectivity, interdependence, and
modularity can be expressed in the language of mathematics.
61</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 62 — #2
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
62 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
2.1 Graphs
When faced with a diﬃcult problem in mathematics, it often helps to draw a
picture. If the problem involves a discrete collection of interrelated objects, it
is natural to sketch the objects and draw lines between them to indicate the
relationships. A graph is the mathematical version of such a sketch. In this
section we will study a few basic deﬁnitions about graphs, and then explore
some ways to use graphs to model mathematical relationships. Our approach
here will be informal; later in the chapter we will look at graphs from a more
rigorous point of view.
2.1.1 Edges and Vertices
In Section 2.6, we will give a mathematical deﬁnition of a graph, and we will
prove several theorems about graphs. For now, however, just think of a graph
informally as a diagram of dots, called vertices, connected by lines or curves,
called edges. The edges of a graph may have arrows on them; in this case, the
graph is called a directed graph. A graph without arrows on the edges is called
an undirected graph.
When we draw a graph, it doesn’t really matter where we put the vertices
or whether we draw the edges as curved or straight—the thing that matters is
whether or not two given vertices are connected by an edge (or edges).
Example 2.1 The Pregel River divided the Prussian city of K¨onigsberg (now
Kaliningrad, Russia) into four sections, as shown in Figure 2.2. These sections
were connected by seven bridges. If we draw a vertex for each land mass and
an edge for each bridge, we can represent the city as the following graph.
C
B D
A
Notice that there are some double edges; these reﬂect the presence of two
bridges connecting the same pair of land masses.
The bridges of K¨onigsberg inspired the great eighteenth-century mathe-
matician Leonhard Euler to think about the kinds of relationships that graphs
express. In March of 1736, Euler wrote the following to a colleague:
AproblemwasposedtomeaboutanislandinthecityofK¨onigsberg,
surrounded by a river spanned by seven bridges, and I was asked
whether someone could traverse the separate bridges in a connected</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 63 — #3
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.1 Graphs 63
C B
A
D
...
Figure 2.2 The bridges of K¨onigsberg.
walk in such a way that each bridge is crossed only once. I was in-
formed that hitherto no one had demonstrated the possibility of
doing this, or shown that it is impossible. This question is so banal,
butseemedtomeworthyofattentioninthatgeometry,noralgebra,
nor even the art of counting was suﬃcient to solve it. [10]
Although Euler did not use modern notation and terminology, his paper
on the K¨onigsberg bridges is widely regarded as the start of modern graph
theory. [16]
2.1.2 Terminology
In order to work with graphs, it helps to deﬁne some terms. The degree of a
vertex is the number of times an edge touches it. This is diﬀerent than the
number of edges touching it, because an edge may form a loop, as in Figure 2.3.
In graph H, vertex x has degree 5. In a directed graph, we can speak of the
indegree (the number of edges coming in to the vertex) and the outdegree (the
number of edges going out). In Figure 2.3, vertex a of graph G has indegree 1
and outdegree 2.
A path in a graph is a sequence
v
0
,e
1
,v
1
,e
2
,v
2
,...,v
n−1
,e
n
,v
n
of vertices v
i
and edges e
j
such that edge e
i
connects vertices v
i−1
and v
i
. Here
n≥1. A circuit is a path that ends where it begins, so v
0
= v
n
. An undirected
graph is connected if there is a path connecting any two pairs of vertices. A
directed graph is connected if the underlying undirected graph is.
In Figure 2.3, graph H is connected, and therefore so is graph G. There
is a circuit in graph H going around the large quadrilateral: start at vertex v,
follow the edges clockwise through vertices w, x, and z, and return to vertex v.
However, the corresponding sequence is not a circuit in graph G because the
edge from a to e goes the wrong direction.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 64 — #4
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
64 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
GH
b
d
ae
c x
w
y
vz
Figure 2.3 Graph H is the underlying undirected graph of the directed
graph G.
Why do we need all these terms? One reason is that terminology makes
it easier to make precise descriptions of the relationships that graphs deﬁne.
Let’s take another look at the bridges of K¨onigsberg. In his 1736 paper, Euler
made the following observations (quoted in [16]).
1. The number of bridges written next to the letters A, B, C, etc. together
add up to twice the total number of bridges. The reason for this is that,
in the calculation where every bridge leading to a given area is counted,
each bridge is counted twice, once for each of the two areas which it joins.
2. If there are more than two areas to which an odd number of bridges lead,
then such a journey is impossible.
3. If, however, the number of bridges is odd for exactly two areas, then the
journey is possible if it starts in either of these two areas.
4. If, ﬁnally, there are no areas to which an odd number of bridges lead,
then the required journey can be accomplished starting from any area.
We can use modern terminology to restate these observations. Let’s deﬁne
an Euler path (resp. circuit) as a path (resp. circuit) that uses every edge of
the graph exactly once.
1. In any graph, the sum of the degrees of the vertices equals twice the
number of edges.
2. If a graph has more than two vertices of odd degree, it does not have an
Euler path.
3. If a connected graph has exactly two vertices, v and w, of odd degree,
then there is an Euler path from v to w.
4. If all the vertices of a connected graph have even degree, then the graph
has an Euler circuit.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 65 — #5
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.1 Graphs 65
The vertices A, B, C, and D of the graph of Example 2.1 have degrees
3, 5, 3, and 3, respectively. Therefore, (if we trust Euler), this graph does not
have an Euler path. Note that we haven’t yet given rigorous proofs for any of
Euler’s observations, but we have managed to state them a little more clearly
and concisely.
2.1.3 Modeling Relationships with Graphs
In addition to the “banal” problem of walking over bridges, there are many
other applications of graphs for problems involving relationships.
Example 2.2 Acollegeregistrarwouldliketoschedulethefollowingcoursesin
as few time slots as possible: Physics, Computer Science, Chemistry, Calculus,
Discrete Math, Biology, and Psychology. However, from previous experience,
the following pairs of classes always have students in common, so they can’t be
scheduled in the same time slot:
Physics and Computer Science
Physics and Chemistry
Calculus and Chemistry
Calculus and Physics
Calculus and Computer Science
Calculus and Discrete Math
Calculus and Biology
Discrete Math and Computer Science
Discrete Math and Biology
Psychology and Biology
Psychology and Chemistry
What is the fewest number of time slots needed to schedule all these classes
without conﬂicts?
Solution: The natural way to model this problem with a graph is to make each
course into a vertex and connect any two vertices that represent courses that
cannot be scheduled in the same time slot. Figure 2.4 shows this graph.
Physics
Chem
Psych
Calc
Bio
DM
CS
Figure 2.4 Graph for Example 2.2.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 66 — #6
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
66 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Let’s start with Calculus: call its time slot A. None of the courses that
share an edge with Calculus can be in time slot A, so pick one, say, Computer
Science, and call its time slot B. Now Physics shares edges with both Calculus
and Computer Science, so this forces us to use a third time slot, C, for Physics.
Weshouldnoteatthispointthatallofourchoiceshavebeenforcedsofar—
we are going to need at least three time slots. The question remains whether
we need more than three slots. Notice that we can assign Chemistry to slot
B (since it doesn’t share an edge with Computer Science) and we can assign
Discrete Math to slot C (since it doesn’t conﬂict with Physics). This allows us
to use B for Biology and either A or C for Psychology, showing that three time
slots are suﬃcient. ♦
This scheduling problem is an example of graph coloring. A coloring for a
graph is an assignment of diﬀerent values (colors) to each vertex such that no
two vertices of the same color share an edge. In Example 2.2, the “colors” were
the time slots A, B, and C.
We call a graph planar if it can be written down (on a “planar” sheet of
paper) without any edges crossing each other. The graph in Figure 2.4 is an
example of a planar graph. The famous Four Color Theorem states that any
planar graph can be colored with, at most, four colors.
1
A consequence of the
Four Color Theorem is that cartographers need only four colors of ink: it is
always possible to color the regions of a planar map (e.g., the states in a map
of the United States) with, at most, four colors, so that no two adjacent regions
have the same color.
Example 2.3 Several departments around campus have wireless access points
(WAPs), but problems arise if two WAPs within 200 feet of each other are
operating on the same frequency. Suppose the departments with WAPs are
situated as follows.
Department: Is within 200 feet of departments:
Math Physics, Psychology, Chemistry, Sociology
Sociology History, English, Economics, Math, Chemistry, Psychology
Physics Math, Chemistry
Psychology Math, Chemistry, Sociology, Economics
History Sociology, English
English Economics, Sociology, History
Economics English, Sociology, Psychology
Chemistry Math, Psychology, Sociology, Physics
1.Althoughthisresultisverysimpletostate,theonlyknownproofstodateareextremely
complicated.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 67 — #7
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.1 Graphs 67
Physics (1)
Math (2) Chem (3)
Soc (4) Psych (1)
Econ (2)Hist (1)
Eng (3)
Figure 2.5 Graph for Example 2.3. Colors/frequencies: 1, 2, 3, 4.
What is the fewest number of frequencies needed? How could these frequencies
be assigned to departments?
Solution: Figure 2.5 shows a graph model for this situation, along with a pos-
sible coloring. We leave it as an exercise to check that four colors (frequencies)
are needed. ♦
In Example 2.3, we modeled the positions of the departments by draw-
ing an edge between any two departments that were “close,” i.e., within 200
yards of each other. If we had more speciﬁc data, we could make our model say
how close each department is to the others by putting numbers on each edge
indicating the distance between two departments. A graph with numerical val-
ues, or weights, on its edges is called a network. Networks can be directed or
undirected, depending on what they are intended to model.
Example 2.4 The following table lists some pairwise driving distances (in
miles) on selected routes between some California cities.
B E F L N S
Barstow
Eureka
Fresno 245 450
Los Angeles 115 645 220
Needles 145 385 260
San Diego 175 125 320
Figure 2.6 shows the graph for this network. Writing the distance data in this
formatmakesiteasiertoanswercertainquestions.HowfarisitfromSanDiego
to Fresno (using these routes)? If we travel from Needles to Fresno via Barstow,
how much longer will it take?
The above examples show how versatile graph models are; often it helps to
add extra structure to a graph (for example, colors or weights) to suit a partic-</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 68 — #8
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
68 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
E
L
F
N
S
B
450
645
220
245
385
145
115
175125
320
260
Figure 2.6 A network showing mileage between cities.
ular application. The next example illustrates another way to add information
to a graph model by specifying how the graph is drawn.
Example 2.5 The custom dictionary in a spell-checker keeps track of words
that you don’t want ﬂagged as misspellings but aren’t in the standard dictio-
nary. These words get added one at a time, in no particular order, but it is
necessary to keep them organized so that searching the list is easy. Suppose
your custom dictionary contains the following words:
macchiato, poset, phat, complexify, jazzed, sheaﬁfy, clueless
What is an eﬃcient way to organize this data?
One possible organizational structure is a graph model called a binary
search tree. The rules for constructing a binary search tree are simple. Start
with an item (chosen arbitrarily) at the top of the tree. This is the root node
of the tree. The root has (at most) two edges touching it, one going down to
the right, and one going down to the left. These are the children of the root
node. In fact, every node in a binary search tree can have up to two children,
one on the right, and one on the left. The only condition is that the right child
(along with its “descendants”) must come after its parent in alphabetical (or
numerical) order, and the left child and its descendants must come before its
parent. For example, in the following tree, x has right child r and left child l,
so this data must have the order l,x,r.
x
lr</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 69 — #9
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.1 Graphs 69
Let’s place the data from Example 2.5 into a binary search tree. Start with
“macchiato” at the root of the tree. The next word, “poset,” comes after “mac-
chiato” in alphabetical order, so “poset” becomes the right child of “macchi-
ato.” We would then place the next word, “phat,” to the right of “macchiato,”
but since that spot is taken, and since “phat” precedes “poset” in alphabetical
order, we make “phat” the left child of “poset.” We continue in this manner,
ﬁnding the new position for each new word by moving down the tree. At each
branch we move right or left, depending on where the new word falls in the
alphabet. Figure 2.7 shows the ﬁrst few steps of this process, along with the
ﬁnal result.
The reason this graph is called a “search” tree is that it makes ﬁnding an
element in the tree easy. If you are looking for a word in a binary search tree,
you go through the same procedure as if you were adding the word to the tree;
if you don’t come across the word, it isn’t there.
For large data sets, this process goes very quickly, since you don’t need to
look at every element. For example, to ﬁnd “poset” in the tree in Figure 2.7, we
only have to look at two words. To establish that “iPod” is not in the tree, we
only need to check three. Each comparison moves the search one level down the
tree, and each level contains twice the number of elements as the level before.
jazzed phat sheafify
poset
poset poset
poset
complexify
complexify
clueless
phat
phat
macchiato
macchiato
macchiato
macchiatomacchiato
. . .
Figure 2.7 Constructing the binary search tree for Example 2.5.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 70 — #10
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
70 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Figure 2.8 A balanced binary search tree with 255 nodes requires, at most,
eight comparisons to search it completely.
So, for example, a balanced binary search tree with
255=1+2+4+8+16+32+64+128
elements requires, at most, eight comparisons to search it completely. See Fig-
ure 2.8.
Note that a binary search tree contains more information than its graph
structureconveys.Thebranchesofthetreealwaysgodownward,anditmatters
whether they go to the left or to the right. Technically, a binary search tree is
a directed graph, with all the edges pointing downward, away from the root.
But most books (including this one) omit the arrows.
Exercises 2.1
1. Consider the following undirected graph.
a
e
d
c
b</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 71 — #11
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.1 Graphs 71
(a) How many edges are there in this graph?
(b) Give the degree of each vertex.
(c) Do these numbers agree with Euler’s ﬁrst observation?
2. Consider the following directed graph.
a
e d
c
b
(a) Give the indegree of each vertex.
(b) Give the outdegree of each vertex.
(c) Compute sum of the indegrees and the sum of the outdegrees. What
do you notice?
3. Draw a connected, undirected graph with seven vertices and no circuits.
How many edges does it have?
4. Draw an undirected graph with six vertices, each of degree 3, such that
the graph is ...
(a) connected.
(b) not connected.
5. A graph is called simple if it has no multiple edges or loops. (The graphs
in Figures 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6 are simple, but the graphs in Example 2.1
and Figure 2.3 are not simple.) Draw ﬁve diﬀerent connected, simple,
undirected graphs with four vertices.
6. Anundirectedgraphiscalledcomplete ifeveryvertexsharesanedgewith
every other vertex. Draw a complete graph on ﬁve vertices. How many
edges does it have?
7. Figure 2.9 shows the bridge conﬁguration of modern day Kaliningrad.
Represent the four land masses and seven bridges as an undirected graph.
Is this graph the same as the one in Example 2.1? Why or why not? Is it
possible to travel an Euler circuit on this graph?</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 72 — #12
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
72 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Figure 2.9 Kaliningrad, Russia.
8. Does the following graph have an Euler path? Why or why not?
9. Think of the Internet as one big graph, where each web page is a vertex
and each link is an edge.
(a) Is this a directed graph? Why or why not?
(b) Is this graph connected? Why or why not?
(c) Is this graph complete? Why or why not?
(d) Is this graph simple? Why or why not?
(e) For a given web page p, what does the outdegree of p represent?
(f) For a given web page p, what does the indegree of p represent?
10. Find a map of the United States. Draw a graph whose vertices represent
the states of Illinois, Missouri, Tennessee, Virginia, West Virginia, Ohio,
Indiana, and Kentucky. Draw an edge between any two vertices whose
states share a common border. Explain why it takes four colors to color
this graph (and hence also to distinguish these states on a map).
11. As in Exercise 10, draw a graph representing the border relationships for
the states of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, California, Nevada, and Utah.
What is the fewest number of colors needed to color this graph? Justify
your answer.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 73 — #13
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.1 Graphs 73
12. Representthe13regionsinSouthAmerica(12countriesplustheterritory
ofFrenchGuiana)asagraph.Whatisthefewestnumberofcolorsneeded
to color this graph?
13. Using as few groups as possible, put the words fish, sit, stay, play,
diet, tree, duck, dog, and hen into groups such that none of the words
in a group have any letters in common. Use a graph model and graph
coloring. Justify your answer: explain why your grouping uses the fewest
groups possible.
14. Give an example of a graph that requires ﬁve colors to make a valid
coloring. (Note that, by the Four Color Theorem, your example cannot
be planar.)
15. Compute the minimal number of colors needed to color the following
graph. Show that your answer is big enough (by describing a coloring),
and explain why the graph cannot be colored in fewer colors.
16. Color the vertices of the following graph so that no vertices of the same
color share an edge. Use as few colors as possible. Explain why the graph
cannot be colored using fewer colors. Be speciﬁc.
17. Around-robintournamentamongfourteams—Canadiens,Canucks,Flames,
andOilers—hasthefollowingresults:CanucksdefeatCanadiens;Canucks
defeat Flames; Canucks defeat Oilers; Canadiens defeat Oilers; Flames
defeat Canadiens; Oilers defeat Flames.
(a) Model these results with a directed graph, where each vertex rep-
resents a team and each edge represents a game, pointing from the
winner to the loser.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 74 — #14
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
74 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
(b) Find a circuit in this graph.
(c) Explain why the existence of a circuit in such a graph makes it hard
to rank the teams from best to worst.
18. Consider the network in Example 2.4. Plan a round trip starting and
ending at San Diego that visits all the other cities in as few miles as
possible. In other words, ﬁnd a circuit that contains every vertex and has
minimal weight.
19. Construct a directed network whose vertices represent the numbers
11,12,13,15,17
and whose weights tell how much you must add to get from one vertex
to another. Include only edges of positive weight.
20. AcarrentalcompanyhasthreelocationsinMexicoCity:theInternational
Airport, Oﬁcina Vallejo, and Downtown. Customers can drop oﬀ their
vehiclesatanyoftheselocations.Basedonpriorexperience,thecompany
expects that, at the end of each day, 40% of the cars that begin the day
at the Airport will end up Downtown, 50% will return to the Airport,
and 10% will be at Oﬁcina Vallejo. Similarly, 60% of the Oﬁcina Vallejo
cars will end up Downtown, with 30% returning to Oﬁcina Vallejo and
10% to the Airport. Finally, 30% of the Downtown cars will end up at
each of the other locations, with 40% staying at the Downtown location.
Model this situation with a directed network. If the company starts with
all of its cars at the Airport, how will the cars be distributed after two
days of rentals?
21. Consider the following list of numbers.
123,684,121,511,602,50,43
(a) Place the numbers, in the order given, into a binary search tree.
(b) The height of a binary search tree is the maximum number of edges
you have to go through to reach the bottom of the tree, starting at
the root. What is the height of the tree in part (a)?
(c) Reorder the numbers so that when they are put into a binary search
tree,theheightoftheresultingtreeislessthantheheightofthetree
in part (a). Give both your new list and the search tree it produces.
22. Put the words
Cheddar Swiss Brie Panela Stilton Mozzarella Gouda
into a binary search tree with the smallest height possible.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 75 — #15
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.2 Sets 75
23. Put the following words into a binary search tree. Add them to the tree
in the order given.
i will not eat them with a fox
24. Sociologists use graphs to model social relationships. A social network
(not to be confused with a network) is a graph where the nodes represent
“actors” (e.g., people, companies) and the edges represent relationships,
or “ties,” between actors (e.g., friendships, business partnerships). Con-
sider the social network in Figure 2.10.
A
BC
D
E
I
G
FH
Figure 2.10 Social network for Exercise 24.
(a) A clique in a social network is a group of actors who all have ties
to each other. What is the largest clique in the social network in
Figure 2.10?
(b) If you had to choose the most important actor in this social network,
who would you pick? Why?
(c) Suppose the actors represent people and the ties represent acquain-
tances.Ifthepeopleinthissocialnetworkcontinuetointeract,which
two (currently unacquainted) actors would you most expect to be-
come acquainted? Which two actors are the least likely to become
acquainted? Why?
2.2 Sets
The applications from the previous section should convince you that graphs are
a powerful mathematical tool. However, our viewpoint wasn’t very rigorous; in
order to prove useful theorems about graphs, we need to consider some more
mathematical structures that describe relationships.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 76 — #16
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
76 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Thesimplestwaytodescribeacollectionofrelatedobjectsisasaset.Think
of the set S as a container where an object x is something that S contains.
S
x
We write x ∈ S to denote that x is contained in S. We also say that “x is a
member of S,” “x is an element of S,” or more simply, “x is in S.”
2.2.1 Membership and Containment
We can describe examples of sets by listing the elements in the set or by de-
scribing the properties that an element in the set has. To say that set S consists
of the elements x
1
,x
2
,...,x
n
, we write
S ={x
1
,x
2
,...,x
n
}.
Suppose there is some property p that some of the elements of a set S have.
We can describe the set of all elements of S that have property p as
{x∈S |x has property p}.
This is sometimes called “set builder” notation, because it explains how to
build a list of all the elements of a set.
Example 2.6 Let A ={1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8}. Then 2∈A and 9negationslash∈A.If
B ={x∈A|x is odd},
then the elements of B are 1,3,5,7.
Example 2.7 There are some common sets that have speciﬁc names. The set
of integers is denoted by Z, and the set of positive integers, or natural numbers
is written as N. Note that 0 ∈ Z, but 0 negationslash∈ N. We use R for the set of real
numbers, and Q for the set of rational numbers.
2
Example 2.8 Let P be the set of all polygons. So P contains all triangles,
squares, pentagons, etc. If c is a circle, then cnegationslash∈P. We could describe the set
H of all hexagons in set builder notation as
H ={x∈P |x has six sides}.
2.Recallthatarationalnumberisanumberthatcanbewrittenasafraction a/b,where a
and b areintegers.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 77 — #17
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.2 Sets 77
The language of sets is convenient for describing groups of objects that are
related by some common property. Often some property implies another; for
example, all integers are real numbers. In terms of sets, this means that the set
Z is contained in the set R. In general, the predicate logic statement that
(∀x)(x∈A→x∈B) (2.2.1)
is written as A ⊆ B, and we say “A is contained in B,” or “A is a subset of
B,” or “B contains A.” We can express this relationship pictorially using the
following Venn diagram.
B
A
Example 2.9 In Example 2.6, B ⊆A. We have noted that Z⊆R in Exam-
ple 2.7, and we could also say that N⊆Z, Z⊆Q, and Q⊆R. This chain of
relationships could also be written as
N⊆Z⊆Q⊆R.
Example 2.10 In Example 2.8, H ⊆P, but P negationslash⊆H, because not every poly-
gon is a hexagon.
Example 2.11 Theempty set∅isthesetthatcontainsnoelements.Therefore,
the empty set is a subset of any set, that is, ∅⊆X for all X. This is because
the statement x∈∅is false for any x, so the implication
(∀x)(x∈∅→x∈X)
must be true. (See the truth table for the “→” connective on page 6.)
2.2.2 New Sets from Old
Sets describe relationships, but the language of sets can also describe the logic
of how things are related. We have seen one example of this already: state-
ment 2.2.1 shows how to interpret the ⊆ symbol in terms of a predicate logic
statementcontainingthe→connective;therelationshipofcontainmenthasthe
logic of an implication. The connectives∨,∧,¬, and↔also have set-theoretic
counterparts.
The union A∪B of two sets A and B is the set containing all the elements
of both A and B put together. An element is in the union of two sets A and B
if the element is A,orB, or both. In set builder notation,
A∪B ={x|(x∈A)∨(x∈B)}.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 78 — #18
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
78 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
This translates to the following equivalence rule in predicate logic.
(∀x)[x∈A∪B ⇔(x∈A)∨(x∈B)]
The statement x ∈ A∪B is logically equivalent to the statement (x ∈ A)∨
(x ∈ B). This fact is important when writing proofs; one of these statements
can always be replaced by the other.
Think of “union” as the set-theoretic counterpart of the logical “or.” In the
following Venn diagram, A∪B is the shaded area:
BA
The intersection A∩B is the set containing all the elements that A and B
have in common. In order for an element to be in the intersection of A and B,
the element must be in both sets. Therefore we write the intersection as
A∩B ={x|(x∈A)∧(x∈B)}
in set builder notation. This implies the following logical equivalence for all x.
x∈A∩B ⇔(x∈A)∧(x∈B)
In the following Venn diagram, the shaded area represents A∩B:
BA
Implicit in the above predicate logic statements is a domain, or universal
set U, of which every set is a subset. If we know what the domain U is, we can
speak of the complement A
prime
of A, which is the set
A
prime
={x∈U |xnegationslash∈A}.
We usually draw U as a big rectangle, so the shaded area below represents A
prime
.
U
A</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 79 — #19
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.2 Sets 79
Note that we could also write A
prime
={x∈U |¬(x∈A)} to make the use of the
¬ connective explicit.
We say that two sets are equal if they have the same elements. So the
statement “A = B” translates to the following statement in predicate logic:
(∀x)(x∈A↔x∈B).
This translation is important when it comes to proving that two sets are equal.
A proof that A = B usually consists of two direct proofs: given x ∈ A, prove
that x ∈ B, and conversely, given x ∈ B, prove that x ∈ A. In other words,
showing A = B amounts to showing that A⊆B and B ⊆A.
Example 2.12 Let the following sets be given.
X ={n∈Z|n =2k for some odd integer k}
F ={n∈Z|n =4k for some integer k}
E ={n∈Z|n is even}
1. Prove that F ⊆E.
2. Prove that X = E∩F
prime
.
Proof of 1 Let x∈F. By the deﬁnition of F, x =4k for some integer k.We
can write this equation as x = 2(2k), so x is even by Deﬁnition 1.5. Therefore
x∈E. square
Proof of 2 (We ﬁrst show that X ⊆ E∩F
prime
.) Let x ∈ X. Then x =2k for
some odd integer k,sox is even. Therefore x ∈ E. Suppose, to the contrary,
that x ∈ F. Then x =4j for some integer j. This implies that 2k =4j,or
k =2j, which contradicts that k is odd. Therefore x ∈ F
prime
. Since x ∈ E and
x∈F
prime
, we have shown that x∈E∩F
prime
.
(We now show that E∩F
prime
⊆X.) Suppose x∈E∩F
prime
,sox∈E and x∈F
prime
.
Since x ∈ E, x =2k for some integer k. Suppose, to the contrary, that k is
even. Then k =2l for some integer l,sox = 2(2l)=4l. But this contradicts
that x∈F
prime
. Therefore k must be odd. This establishes that x∈X. square
These proofs illustrate how to translate back and forth between the lan-
guageofsetsandthelanguageoflogic.Forexample,thestatement“x∈E∩F
prime
”
was translated as “x∈E and x∈F
prime
.” In general, any statement involving sets
and the symbols ∩, ∪, ⊆,=,and
prime
translates into a logical statement using
the connectives ∧, ∨, →, ↔, and ¬, respectively. So all the work we did in
propositional and predicate logic (Sections 1.2 and 1.3) will now pay oﬀ when
dealing with sets.</p>
  </body>
</html>