<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Unknown</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8"/>
    <meta name="DC.Title" content="Unknown"/>
    <style type="text/css">body { margin: 0%;padding: 0%;} .cover { text-align: center;margin-left: 0%;margin-right: 0%;} .coverpage { text-align: center;vertical-align: middle;text-shadow: #000 0px 1px 1px;margin-left: 0px;margin-right: 0px;margin-top: 0px;padding-top: 3em;margin-botton: 3em;font-size: 3.0em;background: #2F4F4F;} .coverimg { margin-top: 0%;margin-left: 0%;margin-right: 0%;width: 100%;} p { margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;} span { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} div { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} p { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} blockquote { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} h1 { text-align: center;} h2 { text-align: center;} h3 { text-align: center;} h4 { text-align: center;} h5 { text-align: center;} h6 { text-align: center;}</style>
  </head>
  <body>
      <h1>Unknown</h1>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 80 — #20
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
80 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Think of the symbols ∩, ∪, ⊆,=,and
prime
as tools for making new sets from
old ones. For example, given two sets, A and B, we can build a new set, A∩B,
consisting of all the elements the two sets have have in common. We can also
take two sets A and B and form their Cartesian product A×B. The Cartesian
product is just the set of all ordered pairs where the ﬁrst item comes from the
ﬁrst set and the second item comes from the second set. Formally,
A×B ={(a,b)|a∈A and b∈B}.
We can also have ordered triples, quadruples, and so on. The set
A
1
×A
2
×···×A
n
={(a
1
,a
2
,...,a
n
)|a
i
∈A
i
}
is the set of ordered n-tuples where the ith item comes from set A
i
.
Two ordered pairs are equal if and only if their corresponding parts are
equal. In other words,
(a,b)=(c,d) ⇔ a = c and b = d.
You are already quite familiar with the Cartesian product R×R, the set of all
ordered pairs of real numbers. This set is the usual Cartesian plane from high
school algebra.
One last construction that is sometimes useful is the power set P(S)ofthe
set S. The power set of S is the set of all subsets of S:
P(S)={X |X ⊆S}.
Note that the empty set ∅ is a member of P(S), no matter what S is, because
the empty set is a subset of any set.
Example 2.13 Suppose you want to form a study group with some of the
other students in your class. If S is the set of all students in your class, then
P(S) is the set of all possible study groups you could form. (The empty set
would represent the decision not to form a study group at all!)
Example 2.14 Let A ={1,2,3,4,5}, B ={4,5,6,7,8}, and suppose the uni-
versal set is U ={1,2,...10}. Then
A∪B ={1,2,...,8}
A∩B ={4,5}
B
prime
={1,2,3,9,10}
(A∩B)×A ={(4,1),(4,2),(4,3),(4,4),(4,5),(5,1),(5,2),(5,3),(5,4),(5,5)}
P(A∩B)={∅,{4},{5},{4,5}}
Notice that, while A and B are sets of numbers, the sets you construct from A
and B may have diﬀerent kinds of elements. For example, (A∩B)×A is a set
of ordered pairs, and P(A∩B) is a set of sets.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 81 — #21
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.2 Sets 81
2.2.3 Identities
Since there is such a direct relationship between logic and set theory, we can
write down many facts about sets that follow immediately from things we know
from our study of logic. For example, the addition inference rule
p⇒p∨q
allows us to prove the identity
A⊆A∪B
in set theory.
Proof that A⊆A∪B Let x∈A. By the addition rule, (x∈A)∨(x∈B).
By the deﬁnition of set union, x∈A∪B, as required. square
De Morgan’s laws for sets follow from the equivalence rule of the same
name.
Theorem 2.1 Let A and B be sets. Then
1. (A∪B)
prime
= A
prime
∩B
prime
2. (A∩B)
prime
= A
prime
∪B
prime
The proof of this theorem illustrates how to prove set equalities.
Proof We will prove part 1. (Part 2 is similar.) Let x ∈ (A∪B)
prime
. In other
words, if P(x) is the statement “x ∈ A” and Q(x) is the statement “x ∈ B,”
we are starting with the assumption¬(P(x)∨Q(x)). By De Morgan’s laws for
propositional logic, this is equivalent to¬P(x)∧¬Q(x), which, in the language
of set theory, is the same as x∈A
prime
∩B
prime
. We have shown that
x∈(A∪B)
prime
⇔ x∈A
prime
∩B
prime
,
hence the sets (A∪B)
prime
and A
prime
∩B
prime
are equal. square
Take a look back at this proof, and notice two things. First, the proof
establishes an “if and only if” claim, since all of its deductions are based on
logical equivalences. Second, the proof illustrates that the way to show an
equality U = V of sets is to show that x∈U ⇔x∈V.
The proof of Theorem 2.1 consists of a simple chain of equivalences. When
the structure of a proof is this basic, we might opt to write it in the following
format.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 82 — #22
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
82 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Proof of Theorem 2.1, “⇔” version We will prove part 1. (Part 2 is
similar.)
x∈(A∪B)
prime
⇔¬(x∈A∪B) Deﬁnition of
prime
⇔¬[(x∈A)∨(x∈B)] Deﬁnition of ∪
⇔¬(x∈A)∧¬(x∈B) De Morgan’s law (logic)
⇔ (x∈A
prime
)∧(x∈B
prime
) Deﬁnition of
prime
⇔ x∈A
prime
∩B
prime
Deﬁnition of ∩
Therefore the sets (A∪B)
prime
and A
prime
∩B
prime
are equal. square
Proofs of identities can often be written in this format. Notice that each
“⇔” is justiﬁed by a reason in the rightmost column.
Sets that contain a ﬁnite number of elements are called ﬁnite sets.Itis
convenient to denote the number of elements in a ﬁnite set S by |S|. For ex-
ample, if S is the set containing all the members of the Unites States House of
Representatives, then |S|= 435.
One handy rule dealing with set sizes is the inclusion–exclusion principle.
|A∪B|=|A|+|B|−|A∩B| (2.2.2)
It is easy to see why this rule must hold by looking at the Venn diagrams for
A∪B and A∩B at the beginning of Section 2.2.2. Counting the elements of
A∪B by counting the elements in A and B and adding would double-count
the elements that lie in A∩B. This is the reason for the “ −|A∩B|” on the
right-hand side of Equation 2.2.2. This equation can help organize counting
problems involving sets that overlap.
Example 2.15 The Masters of the Universe Society at a certain college ac-
cepts members who have 1600 SAT scores or 4.0 GPA scores in high school.
Of the 11 members of the society, 8 had 1600 SAT scores, and 5 had 4.0 GPA
scores. How many members had both 1600 SAT scores and 4.0 GPA scores?
Solution: Let A be the set of members with 1600 SAT scores, and let B be the
set of members with 4.0 GPA scores. Then A∩B is the set of members with
both. By the inclusion–exclusion principle (Equation 2.2.2),
11=8+5−|A∩B|
so there are two members with both 1600 SAT scores and 4.0 GPA scores. ♦
Wewillapplytheinclusion–exclusionprincipletohardercountingproblems
in Chapter 4.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 83 — #23
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.2 Sets 83
Exercises 2.2
1. DrawVenndiagramstoillustrateDeMorgan’slawsforsets(Theorem2.1).
2. Draw a Venn diagram to show the region A∩B
prime
. This region is also
denoted A\B, and is called the set diﬀerence, for obvious reasons.
3. Let A = {2,3,4}, B = {3,4,5,6}, and suppose the universal set is U =
{1,2,...,9}. List all the elements in the following sets.
(a) (A∪B)
prime
(b) (A∩B)×A
(c) P(B\A)
4. Let the following sets be given.
G = the set of all good citizens.
C = the set of all charitable people.
P = the set of all polite people.
Write the statement, “Everyone who is charitable and polite is a good
citizen,” in the language of set theory.
5. Consider the following sets. The universal set for this problem is N.
A = The set of all even numbers.
B = The set of all prime numbers.
C = The set of all perfect squares.
D = The set of all multiples of 10.
Usingonlythesymbols3,A,B,C,D,N,∈,⊆,=,negationslash=,∩,∪,×,
prime
,∅,(, ),write
the following statements in set notation.
(a) None of the perfect squares are prime numbers.
(b) All multiples of 10 are even numbers.
(c) The number 3 is a prime number that is not even.
(d) If you take all the prime numbers, all the even numbers, all the
perfect squares, and all the multiples of 10, you still won’t have all
the natural numbers.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 84 — #24
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
84 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
6. Consider the following sets. The universal set U for this problem is the
set of all residents of India.
A = the set of all English speakers.
B = the set of all Hindi speakers.
C = the set of all Urdu speakers.
Express the following sets in the symbols of set theory.
(a) Residents of India who speak English, Hindi, and Urdu.
(b) Residents of India who do not speak English, Hindi, or Urdu.
(c) Residents of India who speak English, but not Hindi or Urdu.
7. Consider the following sets. The universal set for this problem is the set
of all quadrilaterals.
A = The set of all parallelograms.
B = The set of all rhombuses.
C = The set of all rectangles.
D = The set of all trapezoids.
Using only the symbols x,A,B,C,D,∈,⊆,=,negationslash=,∩,∪,×,
prime
,∅,(,), write
the following statements in set notation.
(a) The polygon x is a parallelogram, but it isn’t a rhombus.
(b) There are other quadrilaterals besides parallelograms and trape-
zoids.
(c) Both rectangles and rhombuses are types of parallelograms.
8. Two sets are called disjoint if they have no elements in common, i.e., if
their intersection is the empty set. Prove that ﬁnite sets A and B are
disjoint if and only if|A|+|B|=|A∪B|. Use the deﬁnition of∅and the
inclusion–exclusion principle (Equation 2.2.2) in your proof.
9. In a class of 40 students, everyone has either a pierced nose or a pierced
ear. The professor asks everyone with a pierced nose to raise their hands.
Nine hands go up. Then the professor asked everyone with a pierced ear
to do likewise. This time there are 34 hands raised. How many students
have piercings both on their ears and their noses?
10. How many integers in the set {n ∈ Z | 1 ≤ n ≤ 700} are divisible by
2or7?</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 85 — #25
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.2 Sets 85
11. Let A, B, and C be sets, and let X = A∪B.
(a) Write |X∩C| in terms of |A∩C|, |B∩C|, and |A∩B∩C|. Hint:
In the following Venn diagram, X∩C is the shaded area.
AB
C
(b) Write |A∪B∪C| in terms of A, B, C, |A∩B|, |A∩C|, |B∩C|,
and|A∩B∩C|. (The result is the inclusion–exclusion principle for
three sets.)
12. How many integers in the set{n∈Z|1≤n≤700}are divisible by 2, 5,
or 7?
13. Let S ={a,b,c}. Write down all the elements in the following sets.
(a) S×S
(b) P(S)
14. An integer solution to the equation 3x +4=7y is an ordered pair of
integers (x,y) that satisﬁes the equation. For example, (1,1) is one such
solution. Write the set of all integer solutions to the equation 3x+4=7y
in set builder notation.
15. Use Deﬁnition 1.6 to write the set of odd integers in set builder notation.
16. List all the elements of P(P({1})).
17. Prove part 2 of Theorem 2.1.
18. Give a direct proof that for any set S,(S
prime
)
prime
= S. (Hint: Follow the format
of the proof of Theorem 2.1. You need to show that
x∈(S
prime
)
prime
⇔x∈S
for all x in S. Translate this statement into a statement in predicate logic,
and use an equivalence rule from Section 1.2.)</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 86 — #26
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
86 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
19. Let E be the set of all even integers, and let O be the set of all odd
integers.
(a) Explain why E∪O⊆Z.
(b) Explain why Z⊆E∪O.
20. Let X, Y, and Z be sets. Use the distributive property from propositional
logic (Exercise 14 in Section 1.1) to prove that
X∩(Y ∪Z)=(X∩Y)∪(X∩Z).
21. Let A and B be sets. Prove that A∩B ⊆A∪B.
22. Let X be a ﬁnite set with |X|> 1. What is the diﬀerence between P
1
=
X×X and P
2
={S ∈P(X)||S|=2}? Which set, P
1
or P
2
, has more
elements?
23. Draw an undirected graph G with the following properties. The vertices
ofGcorrespondtotheelementsofP({0,1}).Twovertices(corresponding
to A,B ∈P({0,1})) are connected by an edge if and only if A∩B =∅.
24. Repeat Exercise 23 using P({0,1,2}) instead of P({0,1}).
25. LetX beanyﬁniteset.ConsiderthegraphGdescribedinExercise23,re-
placingP({0,1}) withP(X). Explain why G must be a connected graph.
2.3 Functions
You have probably seen functions before. For example, in high school algebra,
you learned how to graph functions like
f(x)=x
2
−3x+2 (2.3.3)
and do various calculations. But this is a very speciﬁc kind of function; in this
section we will look at functions from a more general perspective, using the
language of sets.
Like sets, functions describe mathematical relationships. In this type of
relationship, the value of one object is completely determined by the value of
another. In Equation 2.3.3, the value of f(x) is forced if we know x’s value.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 87 — #27
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.3 Functions 87
2.3.1 Deﬁnition and Examples
Deﬁnition 2.1 A function from a set X to a set Y is a well-deﬁned rule that
assigns a single element of Y to every element of X.Iff is such a function, we
write
f: X −→ Y
and we denote the element of Y assigned to x∈X by f(x). The set X is called
the domain of the function, and the set Y is called the codomain.
Example 2.16 Let X = {1,2,3} and Y = {1,2,3,4}. The formula f(x)=
x+1 deﬁnes a function f: X −→ Y. For this function, f(1) = 2, f(2) = 3 and
f(3) = 4. Figure 2.11 shows one way to represent this function graphically.
X
Y
11
2
2
3
3 4
Figure 2.11 The function f maps each element of X to an element of Y.
Example 2.17 Theformulaf(x)=x
2
−3x+2deﬁnesafunctionf: R−→ R.
Example 2.18 Let W be the set of all words in this book, and let L be the
set of all letters in the alphabet. Deﬁne a function f: W −→ L by setting
f(w) equal to the ﬁrst letter in the word w. Notice that the choice of word w
completely determines f(w), the ﬁrst letter in the word.
Example 2.19 A propositional statement in two variables deﬁnes a function
w: {T,F}×{T,F}−→{T,F}
wherew(A,B)isthetruthvalueofthestatementwhenthevariableshavetruth
values A and B. For example, the statement A∨B deﬁnes a function whose
values are given by the following table.
A B w(A,B)
T T T
T F T
F T T
F F F</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 88 — #28
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
88 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Example 2.20 Let F be the set of all nonempty ﬁnite sets of integers, so
F ⊆P(Z). Deﬁne a function
s: F −→ Z
by setting s(X) to be the sum of all the elements of X. For example,
s({1,2,3})=6.
Anotherwordforfunctionismap.Thisreﬂectsthethinkingthatafunction
is a way of describing a route from one set to another. In Example 2.20, we are
describing a way to get from a ﬁnite set of integers to a particular integer, i.e.,
we are describing a map from the set of all ﬁnite sets of integers to the set of
integers. This function maps the set {1,2,3} to the integer 6.
Wecanrepresentafunctionbyagraph.Theverticesofthegraphrepresent
the elements of the domain and codomain of the function. For each element in
the domain, there is a directed edge to some element in the codomain.
Example 2.21 Let N = {−2,−1,0,1,2}. Deﬁne a function s: N −→ N by
s(n)=n
2
−2. Represent this function with a directed graph.
Solution: Since the domain and codomain are the same set, we can represent
the function with just ﬁve vertices:
–1
–2
1
0
2
However, it is often more useful to represent the domain separately from the
codomain. And following the s: N −→ N notation, we put the vertices for the
domain on the left and the vertices for the codomain on the right.
–2
–1
0
1
2
–2
–1
0
1
2
♦
Notice that the deﬁnition of a function restricts the features of the graph.
Every vertex representing an element of the domain must have outdegree 1.
As an exercise, think about what a graph representing the following function
would look like.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 89 — #29
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.3 Functions 89
Example 2.22 Let X be a set. Then the identity function
1
X
: X −→ X
is deﬁned by 1
X
(x)=x.
The f(x) notation suggests the most important aspect of the deﬁnition of
function: the value of the function is completely determined by the object you
“plug in” to the function. More precisely, the condition that a function must
be well deﬁned means that f(x) has a value for every x in the domain, and
a = b ⇒ f(a)=f(b)
for any a and b in the domain.
A proposed function f: X −→ Y can fail to be well deﬁned in two ways:
(1) some x in the domain X can fail to have a y in the codomain to which
to map, or (2) some x in the domain can be mapped (ambiguously) to two
diﬀerent y’s in the codomain.
Example 2.23 Let P be the set of all people (alive or dead). Let
m: P −→ P
be such that m(x) is the birth mother of x. We have to make some reasonable
biological assumptions to regard this as a well-deﬁned function: everybody has
a birth mother (e.g., no clones) and no person can have two diﬀerent birth
mothers.
Think of functions as tools for describing relationships between the ele-
ments of a set, or the elements of two diﬀerent sets. In our list of functions
above, Example 2.23 describes the maternal relationships of all people (alive
or dead), while Example 2.20 shows how to describe sets of integers with inte-
gers. Example 2.22 is rather trivial and describes a trivial relationship that the
elements of any set have.
It might seem obvious that functions given by formulas are always well
deﬁned, but diﬃculties can arise if there is more than one way to write the
same element of the domain, as in the following example.
Example 2.24 LetQ ={x/y|x,y∈Z,ynegationslash=0}bethesetofrationalnumbers.
Set
f(x/y)=x+y
for any x/y∈Q. Does this yield a well-deﬁned function f: Q−→ Z?</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 90 — #30
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
90 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Solution: No. As a counterexample, note that 2/3=4/6, but
f(2/3)=2+3=5negationslash= f(4/6)=4+6=10,
so f is not well deﬁned. ♦
When deﬁning a function on a domain like this, it is wise to check that
your function is well deﬁned.
Example 2.25 Show that the function f: Q−→ Q deﬁned by
f(x/y)=
x+y
y
is well deﬁned.
Proof Let a/b = c/d∈Q. Then
f(a/b)=
a+b
b
=
a
b
+
b
b
=
c
d
+
d
d
=
c+d
d
= f(c/d)
so f is well deﬁned. square
2.3.2 One-to-One and Onto Functions
Just as it is useful to describe diﬀerent properties that relationships have, it is
useful to name certain properties of functions.
Deﬁnition 2.2 A function f: X −→ Y is injective (or one-to-one) if, for all
a and b in X, f(a)=f(b) implies that a = b. In this case we say that f is a
one-to-one mapping from X to Y.
Deﬁnition 2.3 A function f: X −→ Y is surjective (or onto) if, for all y∈Y,
there exists an x∈X such that f(x)=y. In this case we say that f maps X
onto Y.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 91 — #31
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.3 Functions 91
X
Y
f
Figure 2.12 A one-to-one function maps each element of X to a diﬀerent
element of Y.
X Yf
Figure 2.13 An onto function maps something onto each element of Y.
Fromthispointon,wewillusethelessformaltermsone-to-one andonto to
describeinjectiveandsurjectivefunctions.
3
ThegraphsinFigures2.12and2.13
illustrate why these terms are appropriate. A one-to-one function will always
map diﬀerent elements of the domain to diﬀerent elements of the codomain.
In other words, at most, one element of the domain maps to any one element
of the codomain. In terms of graph theory, the indegree of every vertex in the
codomain is, at most, 1.
We use the term image to describe the set of all values a function can take.
An onto function has every element of the codomain in its image. Figure 2.13
illustrates an onto function. Notice that the domain gets mapped onto the
entire codomain. In the graph of an onto function, the indegree of every vertex
in the codomain is at least 1.
Remember(Section1.4.1)howdeﬁnitionsareusedinmathematics:inorder
to prove a function is one-to-one or onto, we almost always have to use the
deﬁnition.
Example 2.26 Prove that the function f: Z−→ Z deﬁned by f(x)=2x+1
is one-to-one.
3.Notethatwearenowusingtheword“onto”asanadjective,aswellasapreposition.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 92 — #32
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
92 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Proof Let a,b∈Z and suppose f(a)=f(b). Then
2a+1=2b+1
2a =2b
a = b
We have shown that f(a)=f(b) implies that a = b, i.e., that f is one-to-one.
square
Letfloorleftxfloorrightdenote the greatest integer less than or equal to x. So, for example,
floorleft4.3floorright =4,floorleft−2.1floorright = −3, and floorleft17floorright = 17. The function that maps x to floorleftxfloorright is
called the ﬂoor function.
Example 2.27 Let f: R−→ Z be deﬁned by f(x)=floorleftxfloorright. Prove that f maps
R onto Z.
Proof Let n∈Z. Then, since Z⊆R, n∈R as well. But since n is an integer,
floorleftnfloorright= n. Therefore f(n)=n. square
The proofs in the last two examples are standard. To prove a function f is
one-to-one, suppose f(a)=f(b) and show a = b. To show that a function f is
onto, let y be some element of the codomain, and ﬁnd some x in the domain
such that f(x)=y.
To prove that a function is not one-to-one or onto, look for a counterex-
ample. The function in Example 2.26 is not onto because, for example, 38∈Z,
but there is no integer x such that 2x+1 = 38. Likewise, the function in Ex-
ample 2.27 is not one-to-one because floorleft9.3floorright = floorleft9.8floorright, but 9.3 negationslash=9.8. Note that
these two examples show that one-to-one is not the same as onto.
Of course, it is possible for a function to be both one-to-one and onto; the
identity function of Example 2.22 is one example. Such a function is called a
one-to-one correspondence,ormoreformally,abijection.Comparethefollowing
example to Example 2.26.
Example 2.28 Prove that the function f: R−→ R deﬁned by f(x)=2x+1
is a one-to-one correspondence.
Proof We need to show that f is both one-to-one and onto. The proof that it
is one-to-one is exactly the same as in Example 2.26. To prove that f is onto,</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 93 — #33
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.3 Functions 93
let y∈R be any real number. Set x =(y−1)/2. Then x∈R and
f(x)=f((y−1)/2)
= 2[(y−1)/2]+1
= y−1+1
= y
Thus f is onto as well. square
Example 2.29 Let E ={n ∈Z| n is even} and let O ={n ∈Z| n is odd}.
Deﬁne a function
f: E×O−→ Z
by f(x,y)=x+y.Isf one-to-one and/or onto? Prove or disprove.
Solution: We ﬁrst show that f is not onto. Suppose, to the contrary, that f is
onto. Since 2 ∈ Z is an element of the codomain, there is some ordered pair
(x,y)∈E×O such that
f(x,y)=x+y =2.
But since x is even and y is odd, x+y is odd, by Exercise 9 of Section 1.5. This
contradicts that 2 is even.
We next show that f is not one-to-one. Notice that
f(4,−3) = 1 = f(6,−5)
but (4,−3)negationslash=(6,−5). This counterexample shows that f is not one-to-one. ♦
Example 2.30 Let P be a set of n points lying on a circle. Draw lines con-
necting every point to every other point. Suppose that the points are arranged
so that no three of these lines intersect in a single point inside the circle. (Fig-
ure 2.14 shows a possible conﬁguration.) Let X be the set of all points of
intersection of the lines in the interior of the circle (note that the points in P
are not included in X). Let Y be the set of all sets of four of the points on the
circle, that is,
Y ={{A,B,C,D}⊆P |A,B,C,D are all distinct}.
Describe a one-to-one correspondence f: X −→ Y. Show that your function is
both one-to-one and onto.
Solution: Let H ∈ X be a point of intersection. Then H lies on exactly two
lines, so we can deﬁne f(H) to be the set containing the four distinct endpoints
of these two lines.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 94 — #34
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
94 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Figure 2.14 A possible conﬁguration of points for Example 2.30 with n =8.
We prove that f is one-to-one by contraposition. Suppose H and K are
two distinct points of intersection, so H negationslash= K.Ifl
1
and l
2
are the two lines
intersecting at H, then at least one of the lines intersecting at K must be
diﬀerent from l
1
and l
2
, since two lines can intersect in at most one point. Call
this third line l
3
. Then f(K) contains the endpoints of l
3
, but f(H) does not.
Hence, f(K)negationslash= f(H).
To show that f is onto, let {A,B,C,D}⊆P. Without loss of generality,
we can relabel these points (if necessary) so that A,B,C,D are in order as you
travel clockwise around the circle. Let l
1
be the line through A and C, and let
l
2
be the line through B and D. Since B is on the arc going clockwise from A
to C, and D is on the arc going counterclockwise from A to C, line l
1
separates
B and D, so lines l
1
and l
2
intersect. Call this point of intersection H. Then
f(H)={A,B,C,D}, as required. ♦
Think of a one-to-one correspondence f: X −→ Y as a way to assign every
element of X to a unique element of Y, and vice versa. We sometimes write
X ←→ Y
toemphasizethesymmetryoftherelationshipthataone-to-onecorrespondence
deﬁnes. Every element of one set has a unique partner in the other set.
2.3.3 New Functions from Old
There are some common ways to make new functions out of old ones. One
such construction is the composition of two functions. If f: X −→ Y and
g: Y −→ Z,theng◦f isafunctionfromX toZ deﬁnedby(g◦f)(x)=g(f(x)).
Example 2.31 Let f: R−→ Rbe deﬁned by f(x)=floorleftxfloorright, and let g: R−→ R
be deﬁned by g(x)=3x. Then
(g◦f)(2.4) = g(f(2.4))
= g(2)
=6</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 95 — #35
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.3 Functions 95
and
(f ◦g)(2.4) = f(g(2.4))
= f(7.2)
=7
This example shows that f ◦g can be diﬀerent from g◦f. And note one
potentially confusing thing about the notation: In the composition g◦f,wedo
f ﬁrst, and then apply g to the result. Order matters, in general.
Sometimes we would like to be able to “undo” a function, so that it maps
back to where it came from. If f: X −→ Y is a function, then the inverse of
f is the function
f
−1
: Y −→ X
that has the property that f
−1
◦f =1
X
and f ◦f
−1
=1
Y
.
Not all functions have inverses. If f: X −→ Y has an inverse, then, for any
y ∈ Y, f(f
−1
(y)) = y,sof must map X onto Y. In addition, if f(a)=f(b),
then we can apply f
−1
to both sides of this equation to get a = b,sof must
be one-to-one also. So we see that if a function has an inverse, it must be a
one-to-one correspondence.
Conversely, we can construct the inverse of any one-to-one correspondence
f: X −→ Y by taking f
−1
(y) to be the unique element of X that maps onto y.
We know such an element exists, because f is onto, and we know this element
is unique, since f is one-to-one. This is the only choice we have for f
−1
; see
Exercise 24.
Example 2.32 If f: R −→ {y ∈ R | y>0} is the function f(x)=2
x
, then
the inverse of f is given by f
−1
(x) = log
2
x.
In this last example, we could have deﬁned f(x)=2
x
as a function from
R to R, but then it wouldn’t be invertible because it wouldn’t be onto.
One ﬁnal way to construct functions is by restriction.Iff: X −→ Y is
some function, and H ⊆X, then the restriction of f to H is the function
f|
H
: H −→ Y
deﬁned by taking f|
H
(x)=f(x). In other words, we just restrict the domain
to a smaller set, and use the same rule that assigns an element of the codomain
to each element of this smaller domain. Why bother? Sometimes the new, re-
stricted function is simpler to describe, or has other desirable properties.
Example 2.33 Let D be the unit disk in R
2
, that is,
D ={(x,y)∈R
2
|x
2
+y
2
≤1}</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 96 — #36
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
96 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
and let D
∗
= D\{(0,0)}. Let S
1
= {(x,y) ∈ R
2
| x
2
+y
2
=1} be the unit
circle. Deﬁne a function p: D
∗
−→ S
1
by projecting straight out along a radius
until you reach the boundary of the disk. See the following picture.
(x, y)
p (x, y)
Getting a formula for p might be a little messy, but things can be cleaner if we
consider a restriction. Let H be the circle of radius
1
2
:
H ={(x,y)∈R
2
|x
2
+y
2
=
1
4
}
We’ll leave it as an exercise to show that p|
H
(x,y)=(2x,2y).
Exercises 2.3
1. Let X be a set with four elements. Represent the identity function 1
X
of
Example 2.22 with a directed graph in two diﬀerent ways:
(a) with four vertices, each representing an element in both the domain
and the codomain.
(b) with eight vertices, four for the domain and four for the codomain.
2. See Deﬁnitions 2.2 and 2.3. Write the deﬁnitions of one-to-one and onto
in terms of predicate logic.
3. Show that the function of Example 2.20 is not one-to-one.
4. Show that the function of Example 2.20 is onto.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 97 — #37
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.3 Functions 97
5. Several languages are spoken in India; let L be the set of all such lan-
guages, and let U be the set of all residents of India. Explain why the
proposed function f: U −→ L deﬁned by
f(u) = the language that u speaks
is not well deﬁned.
6. Let P be a set of people, and let Q be a set of occupations. Deﬁne a
function f: P −→ Q by setting f(p) equal to p’s occupation. What must
be true about the people in P for f to be a well-deﬁned function?
7. Is the function of Example 2.23 onto? Why or why not? Is it one-to-one?
Why or why not?
8. Consider Example 2.23. Let y be some person. What is the relationship
of (m◦m)(y)toy?
9. Is the function depicted in Figure 2.12 onto? Why or why not?
10. Is the function depicted in Figure 2.13 one-to-one? Why or why not?
11. Explain why the proof in Example 2.28 could not be used to prove that
the function in Example 2.26 is onto.
12. Consider the situation of Example 2.30. Describe a diﬀerent one-to-one
correspondence g: Y −→ X. Show that your function is both one-to-one
and onto.
13. Consider the negation function n: {T,F}−→{T,F}given by n(x)=¬x.
Is n a one-to-one correspondence? What is n
−1
?
14. Deﬁne a function f: Z−→ Z×Z by f(x)=(2x+3,x−4).
(a) Is f one-to-one? Prove or disprove.
(b) Does f map Z onto Z×Z? Prove or disprove.
15. Deﬁne a map t: R×R−→ R×R by t(a,b)=(a+b,a−b). Prove that
t is a one-to-one correspondence.
16. Let X be a set. Deﬁne a map d: X −→ X×X by d(x)=(x,x).
(a) Is d one-to-one? Prove or disprove.
(b) Is d onto? Prove or disprove.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 98 — #38
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
98 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
17. Let G be a simple, connected, undirected graph. Let V be the set of
vertices in G, and let
P ={{v
1
,v
2
}|v
1
,v
2
∈V,v
1
negationslash= v
2
}
be the set of all unordered pairs of vertices. Let E be the set of all edges
in G. Deﬁne a function f: E −→ P as follows: If e∈E is an edge in G,
then f(e)={a,b}, where a and b are the vertices that e touches.
(a) Explain why f(e) is always a set of size 2. (This better be true, or
f is not well deﬁned.)
(b) Is f one-to-one? Prove or disprove.
(c) Does f map E onto P? Prove or disprove.
18. Let S ={0,1,2,3,4,5}, and letP(S)
∗
be the set of all nonempty subsets
of S. Deﬁne a function m: P(S)
∗
−→ S by
m(H) = the largest element in H
for any nonempty subset H ⊆S.
(a) Is m one-to-one? Why or why not?
(b) Does m map P(S)
∗
onto S? Why or why not?
19. Let X = {n ∈ N | n divides 30030}, and deﬁne a function f: X −→ X
by
f(n)=
30030
n
.
(a) Prove that f is one-to-one.
(b) Prove that f is onto.
20. Let f: Z−→ Z be deﬁned as
f(x)=
braceleftBigg
x+3 ifx is odd
x−5ifx is even
.
(a) Show that f is a one-to-one correspondence.
(b) Find a formula for f
−1
.
21. Deﬁne a function f: N−→ Z by
f(n)=
braceleftBigg
n/2ifn is even
(1−n)/2ifn is odd
.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 99 — #39
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.3 Functions 99
(a) Show that f is one-to-one correspondence.
(b) Find a formula for f
−1
.
22. Deﬁne a function g: Z−→ N,byg(z)=z
2
+1.
(a) Prove that g is not one-to-one.
(b) Prove that g is not onto.
23. Compute the inverse of f(x)=x
3
+ 1. Check your answer by showing
that f(f
−1
(x)) = x and f
−1
(f(x)) = x.
24. Suppose that f: X −→ Y has two inverses, g and h. Prove that g = h,
that is, prove that for all y∈Y, g(y)=h(y).
25. Deﬁne functions f,g: N−→ N by
f(x)=2x
g(x)=floorleftx/2floorright
Is f ◦g the same as g◦f? Explain.
26. Let f: X −→ Y and g: Y −→ Z be one-to-one correspondences. Prove
that (g◦f)
−1
= f
−1
◦g
−1
.
27. Complete Example 2.33. That is, show that p|
H
(x,y)=(2x,2y).
28. Let q: R
2
−→ R
2
be given by q(x,y)=(x,0). Geometrically, q is called
the projection onto the x-axis, because it maps any point straight down
(or up) to the x-axis. Let q|
D
∗ be the restriction of q to the unit disk,
and let p be the function deﬁned in Example 2.33. Draw a well-labeled
picture to show that
p◦q|
D
∗ negationslash= q|
D
∗ ◦p.
29. Suppose f: X −→ Y and g: Y −→ Z are both onto. Prove that g◦f is
onto.
*30. Suppose f: X −→ Y and g: Y −→ Z are both one-to-one. Prove that
g◦f is one-to-one.
*31. Let f: X −→ Y and g: Y −→ Z be functions such that h = g◦f is a
one-to-one correspondence.
(a) Prove that f is one-to-one.
(b) Prove that g is onto.
*32. Let f: X −→ Y be a function. For any subset U ⊆ X, deﬁne the set
f(U):
f(U)={y∈Y |y = f(x) for some x∈U}.
In particular, f(X) is the image of f.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 100 — #40
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
100 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
(a) Let A⊆X and B ⊆X.Doesf(A∩B)=f(A)∩f(B) in general?
Prove it, or give a counterexample.
(b) Let A⊆X and B ⊆X.Doesf(A∪B)=f(A)∪f(B) in general?
Prove it, or give a counterexample.
Hint: Refer to Exercise 20 of Section 1.3.
2.4 Relations and Equivalences
Although functions are used in almost every area of mathematics, many re-
lationships are not functional. For example, we could never deﬁne a function
b(x) that gives the brother of x, because x might have more than one brother
(or no brothers at all). A relation is a more general mathematical object that
describes these kind of relationships.
2.4.1 Deﬁnition and Examples
Deﬁnition 2.4 A relation on a set S is a subset of S×S.IfR is a relation
on S, we say that “a is related to b”if(a,b)∈R, which we sometimes write as
aRb.If(a,b)negationslash∈R, then a is not related to b; in symbols, anegationslashRb.
Some books call this a “binary relation.” It is easy to see how you could
generalize this deﬁnition: you could have a relation between a pair of sets,
or a relation among a list of sets, but these other kinds of relations are less
commonly seen.
Example 2.34 The symbols =, &lt;, >,≤,≥all deﬁne relations onZ(or on any
set of numbers). For example, if S = {1,2,3}, then the relation on S deﬁned
by &lt; is the set {(1,2),(1,3),(2,3)}.
Example 2.35 Let P be the set of all people, living or dead. For any a,b∈P,
let aRbif a and b are (or were) brothers. Then R is a relation on P, and the
ordered pair (Cain,Abel)∈R.
Example 2.36 Let W be the set of all web pages. Then
L ={(a,b)∈W ×W|a has a link to b}
is a relation on W. In other words, aLbif page a links to page b.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 101 — #41
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.4 Relations and Equivalences 101
Example 2.37 Let a,b∈Z. If, for some n∈Z, n|(a−b), we say that “a is
equivalent to b modulo n.” The notation for this relation is
a≡b mod n.
For example, 1,4,7,10,13,... are all equivalent to modulo 3.
Notice that
a≡b mod n⇔n|(a−b)
⇔a−b = kn for some k∈Z
⇔a = b+kn for some k∈Z,
so adding any multiple of n to a number b gives a number that is equivalent to
b modulo n.
2.4.2 Graphs of Relations
Relations and graphs are similar concepts. Given a relation, there is a graph
that models it.
Deﬁnition 2.5 Let R be a relation on a set X. The directed graph associated
with (X,R) is the graph whose vertices correspond to the elements of X, with
a directed edge from vertex x to vertex y whenever xRy.
Example 2.38 Consider the “|” relation on the set X = {2,3,4,6}. Fig-
ure 2.15 shows a directed graph of this relation.
Often a relation R will have the property that xRyif and only if yRx.
Such a relation is called symmetric. For a symmetric relation, the arrows would
comeinpairs—oneineachdirection.Inthiscase,wereplacethethetwoarrows
by a single edge and omit the arrowheads.
26
34
Figure 2.15 A graph of the “|” relation.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 102 — #42
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
102 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
2 6
34
Figure 2.16 A graph of the relation in Example 2.39.
Deﬁnition 2.6 Let R be a relation on a set X, and suppose xRy⇔yRxfor
all x,y ∈ X. The undirected graph associated with (X,R) is the graph whose
vertices correspond to the elements of X, with an (undirected) edge joining any
two vertices x and y for which xRy.
Example 2.39 Deﬁne a relation on the set X = {2,3,4,6} by setting aRb
whenever ab &lt; 13. Since ab &lt; 13⇔ ba &lt; 13, this is a symmetric relation. An
undirected graph of this relation is shown in Figure 2.16.
Every relation yields a graph, but there are graphs that don’t have rela-
tions associated to them. One example is the graph of the K¨onigsberg bridges
in Example 2.1. The double edges in this graph cannot be represented by a re-
lation,becauseanyorderedpair(x,y)canoccur,atmost,onceintheCartesian
product X×X.
2.4.3 Relations vs. Functions
What’s the diﬀerence between a relation and a function? Strictly speaking, a
relation on X is a function X −→ X if each x ∈ X occurs exactly once as
the ﬁrst element of an ordered pair. But this description is fairly mechanical;
what does it really mean? Think of a function as a way of describing how the
elements in one set depend on the elements in another set. When we graph a
function y = f(x), we usually say that y is the dependent variable and x is the
independent variable. This means we get to pick x, and y depends on what we
choose for x.
We can’t view relations this way, because any given x may be related to
several other elements or none at all. Instead, think of relations as describing
comparisons within a set or links between elements of a set.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 103 — #43
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.4 Relations and Equivalences 103
Example 2.40 Let X ={2,3,4,5,6,7,8}, and say that two elements a,b∈X
are related if a | b and a negationslash= b. We can represent this relation with a directed
graph: the elements of X are the vertices, and there is a directed edge from
distinct vertices a and b whenever a|b.
2
3
6
8
5
7
4
This example shows how the relationships described by a relation aren’t con-
strained the way relationships described by a function are: the element 2 is
related to three other elements, while 5 and 7 aren’t related to anything. Thus
this relation does not describe a function on X.
2.4.4 Equivalence Relations
Deﬁnition 2.7 A relation R on a set S is an equivalence relation if it satisﬁes
all three of the following properties.
1. Reﬂexivity. For any a∈S, aRa.
2. Symmetry. For any a,b∈S, aRb⇔bRa.
3. Transitivity. For any a,b,c∈S,ifaRband bRc, then aRc.
Inotherwords,anequivalencerelationisarelationthatisreﬂexive,symmetric,
and transitive.
Example 2.41 The relation on Z deﬁned by = is an equivalence relation,
because equality is reﬂexive, symmetric, and transitive.
The idea of an equivalence relation might seem abstract at ﬁrst, but you
are already quite familiar with an important example: fractions. In elementary
school, you learned that equivalent fractions represent the same number; for
instance,
3
6
is the same as
1
2
. The next example shows how to prove that this
notion is an equivalence relation on the set S of all symbols of the form
x
y
,
where x and y are integers. Be careful: the set S is a set of symbols, not a set
of numbers. Two diﬀerent symbols in S can represent the same number; this is
the point of the equivalence relation.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 104 — #44
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
104 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Example 2.42 Let S be the set of all symbols of the form
x
y
, where x and y
are integers. In other words, S =
braceleftBig
x
y
|x,y∈Z
bracerightBig
. Deﬁne a relation R on S as
follows. For any elements
x
y
and
z
w
in S,
x
y
R
z
w
if xw = yz. The proof that R
is an equivalence relation has three parts:
Proof
1. Reﬂexivity. Suppose that
x
y
∈S. Since xy = yx, we have
x
y
R
x
y
.
2. Symmetry. Suppose that
x
y
,
z
w
∈ S and suppose that
x
y
R
z
w
. By the
deﬁnition of R, this means that xw = yz, which is the same thing as
saying zy = wx.Thus
z
w
R
x
y
, as required.
3. Transitivity. Let
x
y
,
z
w
,
p
q
∈S with
x
y
R
z
w
and
z
w
R
p
q
. Then xw = yz and
zq = wp. Using substitution, xq =(yz/w)(wp/z)=yp. This shows that
x
y
R
p
q
, as required.
square
The next example is a little less familiar, but notice that the proof follows
the same template.
Example 2.43 Given any function f: X →Y, deﬁne a relation on X as fol-
lows. For any a,b∈X, aRbif f(a)=f(b). The proof that R is an equivalence
relation has three parts:
Proof
1. Reﬂexivity.Supposethata∈X.Sincef isawell-deﬁnedfunction,f(a)=
f(a), so aRa.
2. Symmetry. Suppose that a,b ∈ X and that aRb. By the deﬁnition
of R, this means that f(a)=f(b), which is the same thing as saying
f(b)=f(a). Thus bRa, as required.
3. Transitivity. Let a,b,c∈X with aRband bRc. Then f(a)=f(b) and
f(b)=f(c), so by substitution, f(a)=f(c). This shows that aRc.
square
Example 2.44 Saythattwocomputersonanetworkarerelatedifitispossible
to establish a network connection between the two (e.g., it is possible to ping
one from another). In order for this to be an equivalence relation, any computer
must be able to ping itself (reﬂexive), any computer must be able to return a
ping (symmetric), and any computer must be able to pass along a ping to any
other computer that it can ping (transitive).</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 105 — #45
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.4 Relations and Equivalences 105
S
X
1
X
2
X
3
X
4
X
5
X
6
Figure 2.17 The set P ={X
1
,X
2
,X
3
,X
4
,X
5
,X
6
}is a partition of the set S.
Example 2.45 A partition of a set S is a set P of nonempty subsets of S with
the following properties.
1. For any a∈S, there is some set X ∈P such that a∈X. The elements
of P are called the blocks of the partition.
2. If X,Y ∈P are distinct blocks, then X∩Y =∅.
Informally, a partition is a way of dividing a set into nonoverlapping pieces;
in a Venn diagram, a partition looks like an arrangement of walls, where the
blocks of the partition are the rooms. See Figure 2.17.
Suppose P is a partition of S. Deﬁne a relation on S by setting aRbif a
and b belong to the same block. We can prove that R is an equivalence relation.
Proof
1. Reﬂexivity. Suppose that a∈S. Then a must be in some block X, and a
is evidently in the same block as itself. So aRa.
2. Symmetry. Suppose that a,b∈S and suppose that aRb.Thusa and b
are in the same block, which is the same as saying that b and a are in the
same block. Therefore, bRa.
3. Transitivity. Let a,b,c∈S with aRband bRc. Then a and b are in the
same block, and b and c are in the same block, so a and c are in the same
block. Therefore aRc, as required.
square
Example 2.45 shows that every partition determines an equivalence re-
lation. It is also true that every equivalence relation determines a partition.
Partitions and equivalence relations are essentially the same thing.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 106 — #46
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
106 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
Theorem 2.2 Let R be an equivalence relation on a set S. For any element
x ∈ S, deﬁne R
x
= {a ∈ X|xRa}, the set of all elements related to x.
Let P be the collection of distinct subsets of S formed in this way, that is,
P ={R
x
|x∈S}. Then P is a partition of S.
A formal proof of this theorem takes a little bit of work, and we’ll omit the
proof for the sake of brevity. Informally, such a proof must show that the two
properties of a partition are satisﬁed. The ﬁrst property is easy: for any a∈S,
there is a block containing a, namely R
a
. The second property is the hard part.
Roughly speaking, the transitive and symmetric properties guarantee that if
two blocks overlap at all, then they must overlap completely.
The sets R
x
are called the equivalence classes formed by the equivalence
relation. A set S partitioned into equivalence classes looks like this:
S
R
a
R
b
R
c
R
d
R
e
In this picture, the elements a,b,c,d,e ∈ S are called equivalence class repre-
sentatives. As the name suggests, there is usually a choice of representatives for
a given equivalence class. By Theorem 2.2, diﬀerent equivalence classes must
have inequivalent representatives.
Example 2.46 Let W be the set of all words in the sentence, “There are more
things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy.”
Deﬁne a relation R on W as follows: for any words w
1
,w
2
∈W, w
1
Rw
2
if the
ﬁrst letter of w
1
is the same as the ﬁrst letter of w
2
, without regard to upper
or lower cases. (Exercise: show this is an equivalence relation.) The equivalence
classes are the sets of all words beginning with the same letter. For example,
R
things
={There, things, than}.
2.4.5 Modular Arithmetic
Consider the “≡ mod n” relation of Example 2.37. To check that this is an
equivalence relation, we need to prove that it is reﬂexive, symmetric, and tran-
sitive. We’ll show transitivity, and leave the proofs of the other two properties
as exercises.
Lemma 2.1 The “≡ mod n” relation on Z is transitive.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 107 — #47
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.4 Relations and Equivalences 107
Proof Let a,b,c∈Z, and suppose that a≡b mod n and b≡c mod n. This
means that a = b+kn and b = c+ln for some integers k and l. Substituting
the second equation into the ﬁrst, we ﬁnd that
a =(c+ln)+kn= c+(l+k)n
so a≡c mod n, as required for transitivity. square
The set of equivalence classes formed by this equivalence relation is called
theintegers modulo n,andisdenotedZ/n.Weuse[k]todenotetheequivalence
class of [k]. For example, the elements of Z/3 are
[0] ={...,−9,−6,−3,0,3,6,9,...}
[1] ={...,−8,−5,−2,1,4,7,10,...}
[2] ={...,−7,−4,−1,2,5,8,11,...}.
The next result is the basis for modular arithmetic.
Proposition 2.1 Let [a] and [b] be equivalence classes in Z/n. Suppose that
x∈[a] and y∈[b]. Then x+y∈[a+b] and xy∈[ab].
Proof Let [a],[b] ∈ Z/n, and let x ∈ [a] and y ∈ [b]. By the deﬁnition of ≡
mod n, x = a+kn and y = b+ln for some integers k and l. Therefore
x+y =(a+kn)+(b+ln)=(a+b)+(k+l)n
and
xy =(a+kn)(b+ln)=ab+aln+bkn+kln
2
= ab+(al+bk+kln)n,
so x+y≡a+b mod n and xy≡ab mod n, as required. square
What’s so important about this proposition? It shows that if we add or
multiply equivalence class representatives (no matter which ones we choose),
we get a representative of the “right” equivalence class. For example, in Z/3,
−6∈[0] and 11∈[2]. Their sum, −6+11 = 5, is in [2], the natural value for
the “sum” of [0] and [2].
Inotherwords,theoperationsofadditionandmultiplicationonequivalence
classes are well deﬁned:
[a]+[b]=[a+b]
[a]·[b]=[ab].</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 108 — #48
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
108 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
ThismeanswecanaddandmultiplyelementsinZ/nbyaddingandmultiplying
the numbers we use to represent the equivalence class. These are the operations
of modular arithmetic. For example, in the modular arithmetic of Z/12,
[6]+[8] = [2]
because 14≡2 mod 12.
We usually represent an equivalence class in Z/n by its least non-negative
representative, so the operations of modular arithmetic really are just the or-
dinary arithmetic operations followed by taking the remainder upon division
by n.
Although the elements of Z/n are technically sets of numbers (equivalence
classes), we can think of them as a new type of number with new rules for
multiplication and addition. Sometimes we’ll even omit the [ ]’s around these
numbers if the meaning is clear from the context.
Example 2.47 Figure 2.18 shows how to add and multiply in Z/6. Notice the
patternsinthesetables.The“numbers”0and1inZ/6addandmultiplyasthey
do in standard integer arithmetic, but the other numbers behave diﬀerently.
For example, 5∈Z/6 acts like −1, both for addition and multiplication. This
reﬂects the fact that [5] = [−1] as equivalence classes in Z/6.
Modulararithmeticcancomeinquitehandy.Forexample,ifwewantacounter
to keep track of an n-stage process that needs to be repeated several times, we
would start at [0] and add [1] inZ/n at each stage, and the counter would cycle
throughnvaluesandrepeat.Anotherapplication—ISBNcheckdigits—appears
in the exercises.
+ 012345
0 012345
1 123450
2 234501
3 345012
4 450123
5 501234
· 012345
0 000000
1 012345
2 024024
3 030303
4 042042
5 054321
Figure 2.18 Addition and multiplication tables for Z/6.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 109 — #49
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
2.4 Relations and Equivalences 109
Exercises 2.4
1. Let X ={0,1,2,3,4}. Draw the graph associated with the &lt; relation on
X. Should this graph be directed or undirected?
2. Let X = {0,1,2,3,4}. Deﬁne a relation R on X such that xRyif
x + y = 4. Draw the graph associated with this relation. Should this
graph be directed or undirected?
For Exercises 3–6, deﬁne a relationharpoonleftrighton the set S of all strings of let-
ters: two strings are related if you can get one from the other by reversing
one pair of adjacent letters. For example, cowharpoonrightleftocw but cownegationslashharpoonrightleft woc.
3. Consider all the strings you can form with the letters c, a, and t (there
are six). Draw the graph whose nodes are these six strings and whose
edgesrepresenttheharpoonrightleftrelation.Shouldthisbeadirectedoranundirected
graph?
4. Find an Euler path in the graph you made in Exercise 3.
5. Consider the graph formed by theharpoonrightleftrelation on the set of all the strings
you can form from the letters l, y, n, and x. Does this graph have an
Euler path? Why or why not?
6. Does the graph of the harpoonrightleft relation on the set of all strings formed from
the letters l, e, o, p, a, r, and d have an Euler path? Why or why not?
7. Supposeyouwantedtomodelanequivalencerelationwithagraph.Would
you use a directed or an undirected graph? What would the equivalence
classes look like? Explain.
8. Deﬁne a relation on Z by aRbif a
2
= b
2
.
(a) Prove that R is an equivalence relation.
(b) Describe the equivalence classes.
9. Explain why the web linking relation in Example 2.36 is not an equiv-
alence relation. (You only need to give one reason why it fails to be an
equivalence relation.)
10. ProvethattherelationdeﬁnedinExample2.46isanequivalencerelation.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH02˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:03 — page 110 — #50
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
110 Chapter 2 a73 Relational Thinking
11. Explain why the relation R on {0,1,2} given by
R ={(0,0),(1,1),(2,2),(0,1),(1,0),(1,2),(2,1)}
is not an equivalence relation. Be speciﬁc.
12. Let A ={1,2}. Write out the subset of A×A deﬁned by the ≤ relation
on A.
13. Let X ={0,1}.
(a) List (as subsets of X×X) all possible relations on X.
(b) Which of the relations in part (a) are equivalence relations?
14. Let X be a set. Deﬁne a relation R on P(X)by
ARB⇔ A∩B =∅
for A,B ∈P(X). Determine whether this relation is reﬂexive, symmetric,
and/or transitive.
15. Let S be the set of all provinces in Canada. For a,b ∈ S, let aRbif
a and b border each other. Which properties of an equivalence relation
(reﬂexive, symmetric, transitive) does the relation R satisfy?
16. Let T be the set of all movie actors and actresses. For x,y ∈ T, deﬁne
xRyifthereissomemoviethatbothxandy appearin.Whichproperties
of equivalence relations does R satisfy?
17. Let W be the set of words in the English language. Deﬁne a relation R
on W by
w
1
Rw
2
⇔ w
1
and w
2
have a letter in common.
Which properties of equivalence relations does R satisfy? Explain.
18. Let W be the set of words in the English language. Deﬁne a relation S
on W by
w
1
Sw
2
⇔ w
1
has at least as many letters as w
2
.
Which properties of equivalence relations does S satisfy? Explain.
19. Let X be a ﬁnite set. For subsets A,B ∈P(X), let ARBif |A| =
|B|. This is an equivalence relation on P(X). If X = {1,2,3}, list the
equivalence classes.</p>
  </body>
</html>