<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Unknown</title>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8"/>
    <meta name="DC.Title" content="Unknown"/>
    <style type="text/css">body { margin: 0%;padding: 0%;} .cover { text-align: center;margin-left: 0%;margin-right: 0%;} .coverpage { text-align: center;vertical-align: middle;text-shadow: #000 0px 1px 1px;margin-left: 0px;margin-right: 0px;margin-top: 0px;padding-top: 3em;margin-botton: 3em;font-size: 3.0em;background: #2F4F4F;} .coverimg { margin-top: 0%;margin-left: 0%;margin-right: 0%;width: 100%;} p { margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;} span { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} div { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} p { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} blockquote { margin-top: 0%;margin-bottom: 0%;margin-left: 1em;margin-right: 1em;text-align: justify;text-indent: 1.5em;} h1 { text-align: center;} h2 { text-align: center;} h3 { text-align: center;} h4 { text-align: center;} h5 { text-align: center;} h6 { text-align: center;}</style>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div>
      <h1>Unknown</h1>
    </div>
    <div>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 21 — #21
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.2 Propositional Logic 21
Example 1.9 In Section 1.1, we used truth tables to show that a statement
islogically equivalent to itscontrapositive. In thisexample we will construct a
proof sequence for one direction of this logical equivalence:
p→q ⇒¬q →¬p
Solution: We apply the forward–backward approach. The only given statement
is p → q, so we search our derivation rules for something that follows from
thisstatement. The only candidate is ¬p∨q, by the implication rule, so we
tentatively use this as the second step of the proof sequence. Now we consider
the statement we are trying to prove, ¬q →¬p, and we look backward for a
statement from which this statement follows. Since implication is an equivalence
rule, we can also use it to move backward to the statement ¬(¬q)∨¬p, which
we propose as the second-to-last statement of our proof. By moving forward
one step from the given and backward one step from the goal, we have reduced
the task of proving
p→q ⇒¬q →¬p
to the (hopefully) simpler task of proving
¬p∨q ⇒¬(¬q)∨¬p.
Now it is fairly easy to see how to ﬁnish the proof: we can switch the∨statement
around using commutativity and simplify using double negation. We can now
write down the proof sequence.
Statements Reasons
1. p→q given
2. ¬p∨q implication
3. q∨¬p commutativity
4. ¬(¬q)∨¬p double negation
5. ¬q →¬p implication
We used the forward–backward approach to move forward from step 1 to step
2, and again to move backward from step 5 to step 4. Then we connected step
2 to step 4 with a simple proof sequence. ♦
You may have noticed that in Section 1.1, we proved the stronger statement
p→q ⇔¬q →¬p
using truth tables; the above example only proves the “⇒” direction of this
equivalence. To prove the other direction, we need another proof sequence.
However, in this case, this other proof sequence is easy to write down, because
all of the derivation rules we used were reversible. Implication, commutativity,</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 22 — #22
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
22 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
and double negation are all equivalence rules, so we could write down a new
proof sequence with the order of the steps reversed, and we would have a valid
proof of the “⇐” direction.
Exercises 1.2
1. Use truth tables to establish the modustollens tautology:
¬q
p→q
bracerightBigg
⇒¬p
2. Fill in the reasons in the following proof sequence. Make sure you indicate
which step(s) each derivation rule refers to.
Statements Reasons
1. p∧(q∨r) given
2. ¬(p∧q) given
3. ¬p∨¬q
4. ¬q∨¬p
5. q →¬p
6. p
7. ¬(¬p)
8. ¬q
9. q∨r
10. r∨q
11. ¬(¬r)∨q
12. ¬r →q
13. ¬(¬r)
14. r
15. p∧r
3. Justify each conclusion with a derivation rule.
(a) Someone who is artistic must also be creative. Joe is not creative.
Therefore, Joe isnot artistic.
(b) Lingli isboth athletic and intelligent. Therefore, Lingli isathletic.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 23 — #23
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.2 Propositional Logic 23
(c) If you are 18 yearsold, then you may vote. Monique is18 yearsold.
Therefore, Monique may vote.
(d) Marianne has never been north of Saskatoon or south of Santo
Domingo. In other words, she has never been north of Saskatoon
and she has never been south of Santo Domingo.
4. Let x and y be integers. Given the statement
x>yor x isodd.
what statement follows by the implication rule?
5. Let Q be a quadrilateral. Given the statements
If Q isa rhombus, then Q isa parallelogram.
Q isnot a parallelogram.
what statement follows by modustollens?
6. Let x and y be numbers. Simplify the following statement using De Mor-
gan’slawsand double negation.
It isnot the case that x isnot greater than 3 and y isnot found.
7. Write a statement that follows from the statement
It issunny and warm today.
by the simpliﬁcation rule.
8. Write a statement that follows from the statement
This soup tastes funny.
by the addition rule.
9. Recall Exercise 1.1.27. Suppose that all of the following status reports are
correct:
• Processor B is not working and processor C isworking.
• Processor A is working if and only if processor B isworking.
• At least one of the two processors A, B isnot working.
Let a =“A isworking,” b =“B isworking,” and c =“C isworking.”
(a) If you haven’t already done so, write each status report in terms of
a, b, and c, using the symbols of formal logic.
(b) How would you justify the conclusion that B isnot working? (In
other words, given the statements in part (a), which derivation rule
allowsyou to conclude ¬b?)</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 24 — #24
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
24 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
(c) How would you justify the conclusion that C isworking?
(d) Write a proof sequence to conclude that A isnot working. (In other
words, given the statements in part (a), write a proof sequence to
conclude ¬a.)
10. Write a proof sequence for the following assertion. Justify each step.
p→¬q
r → (p∧q)
bracerightBigg
⇒¬r
11. Write a proof sequence for the following assertion. Justify each step.
p
p→r
q →¬r





⇒¬q
12. Write a proof sequence for the following assertion. Justify each step.
p→q
p∧r
bracerightBigg
⇒q∧r
13. Write a proof sequence for the following assertion. Justify one of the steps
in your proof using the result of Example 1.8.
¬(a∧¬b)
¬b
bracerightBigg
⇒¬a
14. Write a proof sequence to establish that p⇔p∧p isa tautology.
15. Write a proof sequence to establish that p ⇔ p∨p isa tautology. (Hint:
Use De Morgan’slawsand Exercise 14.)
16. Write a proof sequence for the following assertion. Justify each step.
¬(¬p→q)∨(¬p∧¬q) ⇒¬p∧¬q
17. Write a proof sequence for the following assertion. Justify each step.
(p∨q)∨(p∨r) ⇒¬r → (p∨q)
18. Consider the following assertion.
¬(¬p∨q) ⇒ p∨q</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 25 — #25
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.2 Propositional Logic 25
(a) Find a statement that is one step forward from the given.
(b) Find a statement that is one step backward from the goal. (Use the
addition rule—in reverse—to ﬁnd a statement from which the goal
will follow.)
(c) Give a proof sequence for the assertion.
(d) Isyour proof reversible? Why or why not?
19. Use a truth table to show that
p→q
¬p
bracerightBigg
?
⇒¬q
is not a tautology. (This example shows that substitution isn’t valid for
inference rules, in general. Substituting the weaker statement, q, for the
stronger statement, p, in the expression “¬p” doesn’t work.)
20. (a) Fill in the reasons in the following proof sequence. Make sure you
indicate which step(s) each derivation rule refers to.
Statements Reasons
1. p→ (q →r) given
2. ¬p∨(q →r)
3. ¬p∨(¬q∨r)
4. (¬p∨¬q)∨r
5. ¬(p∧q)∨r
6. (p∧q) →r
(b) Explain why the proof in part (a) isreversible.
(c) The proof in part (a) (along with its reverse) establishes the following
tautology:
p→ (q →r) ⇔ (p∧q) →r
Therefore, to prove an assertion of the form A ⇒ B → C,itis
suﬃcient to prove
A
B
bracerightBigg
⇒C
instead. Use this fact to rewrite the tautology
p∧(q →r) ⇒ q → (p∧r)
asa tautology of the form
A
B
bracerightBigg
⇒C,</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 26 — #26
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
26 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
where C doesnot contain the → connective. (The process of rewrit-
ing a tautology thisway iscalled the deductionmethod.)
(d) Give a proof sequence for the rewritten tautology in part (c).
21. Thisexercise will lead you through a proof of the distributiveproperty of
∧ over ∨. We will prove:
p∧(q∨r) ⇒ (p∧q)∨(p∧r).
(a) The above assertion is the same as the following:
p∧(q∨r) ⇒¬(p∧q) → (p∧r).
Why?
(b) Use the deduction method to rewrite the tautology from part (b).
(c) Prove your rewritten tautology.
22. Use a truth table to show that (a→b)∧(a∧¬b) isa contradiction.
23. Is a→¬a a contradiction? Why or why not?
1.3 PredicateLogic
When we deﬁned statements, we said that a sentence of the form
x iseven
is not a statement, because its T/F value depends on x. Mathematical writing,
however, almost alwaysdealswith sentencesof thistype; we often express
mathematical ideasin termsof some unknown variable. Thissection explains
how to extend our formal system of logic to deal with this situation.
1.3.1 Predicates
Deﬁnition 1.3 Apredicate is a declarative sentence whose T/F value depends
on one or more variables. In other words, a predicate is a declarative sentence
with variables, and after those variables have been given speciﬁc values, the
sentence becomes a statement.
We use function notation to denote predicates. For example,
P(x)=“x iseven,” and
Q(x,y)=“x isheavier than y”</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 27 — #27
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.3 Predicate Logic 27
are predicates. The statement P(8) istrue, while the statement
Q(feather,brick)
isfalse.
Implicit in a predicate isthe domain (or universe) of valuesthat the vari-
able(s) can take. For P(x), the domain could be the integers; for Q(x,y), the
domain could be some collection of physical objects. We will usually state the
domain along with the predicate, unless it is clear from the context.
Equationsare predicates. For example, if E(x) stands for the equation
x
2
−x−6=0,
thenE(3) istrue and E(4) is false. We regard equations as declarative sentences,
where the = sign plays the role of a verb.
1.3.2 Quantiﬁers
By themselves, predicates aren’t statements because they contain free variables.
We can make them into statements by plugging in speciﬁc values of the domain,
but often we would like to describe a range of valuesfor the variablesin a
predicate. A quantiﬁer modiﬁes a predicate by describing whether some or all
elements of the domain satisfy the predicate.
We will need only two quantiﬁers: universal and existential. The universal
quantiﬁer “for all” isdenoted by ∀. So the statement
(∀x)P(x)
says that P(x) istrue forall x in the domain. Theexistentialquantiﬁer “there
exists” is denoted by ∃. The statement
(∃x)P(x)
says that thereexists an element x of the domain such that P(x) istrue; in
other words, P(x) istrue forsome x in the domain.
For example, if E(x) isthe real number equation x
2
−x−6 = 0, then the
expression
(∃x)E(x)
says, “There is some real number x such that x
2
−x−6 = 0,” or more simply,
“The equation x
2
−x− 6 = 0 hasa solution.” The variable x isno longer a
free variable, since the ∃ quantiﬁer changesthe role it playsin the sentence.
If Z(x) represents the real number equation x·0 = 0, the expression
(∀x)Z(x)</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 28 — #28
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
28 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
means“For all real numbers x, x·0 = 0.” Again, thisisa sentence without free
variables, since the range of possible values for x isclearly speciﬁed.
When we put a quantiﬁer in front of a predicate, we form a quantiﬁed
statement. Since the quantiﬁer restrictsthe range of valuesfor the variablesin
the predicate, the quantiﬁed statement is either true or false (but not both). In
the above examples, (∃x)E(x) and (∀x)Z(x) are both true, while the statement
(∀x)E(x)
is false, since there are some real numbers that do not satisfy the equation
x
2
−x−6=0.
The real power of predicate logic comesfrom combining quantiﬁers, predi-
cates, and the symbols of propositional logic. For example, if we would like to
claim that there isa negative number that satisﬁesthe equation x
2
−x−6=0,
we could deﬁne a new predicate
N(x)=“x isnegative.”
Then the statement
(∃x)(N(x)∧E(x))
translatesas“There existssome real number x such that x isnegative and
x
2
−x−6=0.”
The scope of a quantiﬁer isthe part of the formula to which the quantiﬁer
refers. In a complicated formula in predicate logic, it is important to use paren-
theses to indicate the scope of each quantiﬁer. In general, the scope is what lies
inside the set of parentheses right after the quantiﬁer:
(∀x)(...scope of ∀...), (∃x)(...scope of ∃...).
In the statement (∃x)(N(x)∧E(x)), the scope of the ∃ quantiﬁer isthe expres-
sion N(x)∧E(x).
1.3.3 Translation
There are lotsof diﬀerent waysto write quantiﬁed statementsin English. Trans-
lating back and forth between English statements and predicate logic is a skill
that takespractice.
Example 1.10 Using all carsasa domain, if
P(x)=“x getsgood mileage.”
Q(x)=“x islarge.”</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 29 — #29
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.3 Predicate Logic 29
then the statement (∀x)(Q(x) →¬P(x)) could be translated very literally as
“For all cars x,ifx islarge, then x doesnot get good mileage.”
However, a more natural translation of the same statement is
“All large carsget bad mileage.”
or
“There aren’t any large carsthat get good mileage.”
If we wanted to say the opposite, that is, that there are some large cars
that get good mileage, we could write the following.
(∃x)(P(x)∧Q(x))
We’ll give a formal proof that thisnegation iscorrect in Example 1.13.
The next example shows how a seemingly simple mathematical statement
yieldsa rather complicated formula in predicate logic. The careful use of pred-
icatescan help reveal the logical structure of a mathematical claim.
Example 1.11 In the domain of all integers, let P(x)=“x iseven.” We can
express the fact that the sum of an even number with an odd number is odd
asfollows.
(∀x)(∀y)[(P(x)∧¬P(y)) → (¬P(x+y))]
Of course, the literal translation of this quantiﬁed statement is “For all integers
x and for all integers y,ifx iseven and y isnot even, then x+y isnot even,”
but we normally say something informal like “An even plus an odd is odd.”
This last example used two universal quantiﬁers to express a fact about an
arbitrary pair x,y of integers. The next example shows what can happen when
you combine universal and existential quantiﬁers in the same statement.
Example 1.12 In the domain of all real numbers, let G(x,y) be the predicate
“x>y.” The statement
(∀y)(∃x)G(x,y)
says literally that “For all numbers y, there exists some number x such that
x>y,” or more simply, “Given any number y, there issome number that is
greater than y.” Thisstatement isclearly true: the number y + 1 isalways
greater than y, for example. However, the statement
(∃x)(∀y)G(x,y)
translates literally as “There exists a number x such that, for all numbers y,
x>y.” In simpler language, this statement says, “There is some number that is</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 30 — #30
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
30 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
greater than any other number.” This statement is clearly false, because there
isno largest number.
The order of the quantiﬁers matters. In both of these statements, a claim
ismade that x isgreater than y. In the ﬁrst statement, you are ﬁrst given
an arbitrary number y, then the claim is that it is possible to ﬁnd some x
that is greater than it. However, the second statement claims there is some
number x, such that, given any other y, x will be the greater number. In the
second statement, you must decide on what x isbefore you pick y. In the ﬁrst
statement, you pick y ﬁrst, then you can decide on x.
1.3.4 Negation
The most important thing you need to be able to do with predicate logic is to
write down the negation of a quantiﬁed statement. As with propositional logic,
there are some formal equivalences that describe how negation works. Table 1.5
lists two important rules for forming the opposite of a quantiﬁed statement. It
is easy to see the formal pattern of these two rules: to negate a quantiﬁed
statement, bring the negation inside the quantiﬁer, and switch the quantiﬁer.
Let’sinterpret the negation rulesin the context of an example. In the
domain of all people, let L(x) stand for “x isa liar.” The universal negation
rule says that the negation of “All people are liars” is “There exists a person
who is not a liar.” In symbols,
¬[(∀x)L(x)] ⇔ (∃x)(¬L(x)).
Similarly, the existential negation rule says that the negation of “There exists
a liar” is“There are no liars.”
Example 1.13 In Example 1.10, we discussed what the negation of the state-
ment
“All large carsget bad mileage.”
should be. We can answer this question by negating the formal statement
(∀x)(Q(x) →¬P(x)) (1.3.1)
Equivalence Name
¬[(∀x)P(x)] ⇔ (∃x)(¬P(x)) universal negation
¬[(∃x)P(x)] ⇔ (∀x)(¬P(x)) existential negation
Table 1.5 Negation rulesfor predicate logic.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 31 — #31
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.3 Predicate Logic 31
using a proof sequence. We’ll suppose as given the negation of statement 1.3.1,
and deduce an equivalent statement.
Statements Reasons
1. ¬[(∀x)(Q(x) →¬P(x))] given
2. (∃x)¬(Q(x) →¬P(x)) universal negation
3. (∃x)¬(¬Q(x)∨¬P(x)) implication
4. (∃x)(¬(¬Q(x))∧¬(¬P(x))) De Morgan’slaw
5. (∃x)(Q(x)∧P(x)) double negation
6. (∃x)(P(x)∧Q(x)) commutativity
Notice that the result of our formal argument agrees with the intuitive negation
we did in Example 1.10: There exists some car that is both large and gets good
mileage.
Example 1.14 Let the domain be all facesof the following truncated icosa-
hedron (also known as a soccer ball).
Consider the following predicates.
P(x)=“x isa pentagon.”
H(x)=“x isa hexagon.”
B(x,y)=“x borders y.”
Here we say that two polygons border each other if they share an edge. Conﬁrm
that the following observations are true for any truncated icosahedron.
1. No two pentagonsborder each other.
2. Every pentagon borderssome hexagon.
3. Every hexagon bordersanother hexagon.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 32 — #32
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
32 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
Write these statements in predicate logic, and negate them. Simplify the negated
statements so that no predicate lies withing the scope of a negation. Translate
your negated statement back into English.
Solution: The formalizations of these statements are as follows.
1. (∀x)(∀y)((P(x)∧P(y)) →¬B(x,y))
2. (∀x)(P(x) → (∃y)(H(y)∧B(x,y)))
3. (∀x)(H(x) → (∃y)(H(y)∧B(x,y))
We’ll negate (2), and leave the othersasexercises. See if you can ﬁgure out the
reasons for each equivalence.
¬[(∀x)(P(x) → (∃y)(H(y)∧B(x,y)))]
⇔ (∃x)[¬(P(x) → (∃y)(H(y)∧B(x,y)))]
⇔ (∃x)[¬(¬P(x)∨(∃y)(H(y)∧B(x,y)))]
⇔ (∃x)[¬¬(P(x)∧¬(∃y)(H(y)∧B(x,y)))]
⇔ (∃x)[¬¬(P(x)∧(∀y)¬(H(y)∧B(x,y)))]
⇔ (∃x)(P(x)∧(∀y)¬(H(y)∧B(x,y)))
⇔ (∃x)(P(x)∧(∀y)(¬H(y)∨¬B(x,y)))
⇔ (∃x)(P(x)∧(∀y)(H(y) →¬B(x,y)))
This last statement says that there exists an x such that x isa pentagon and,
for any y,ify isa hexagon, then x doesnot border y. In other words, there is
some pentagon that borders no hexagon. If you found a solid with this property,
it couldn’t be a truncated icosahedron. ♦
1.3.5 TwoCommonConstructions
There are two expressions that come up often, and knowing the predicate logic
for these expressions makes translation much easier. The ﬁrst is the statement
All 〈blanks〉 are 〈something〉.
For example, “All baseball players are rich,” or “All oysters taste funny.” In gen-
eral, if P(x) and Q(x) are the predicates“x is 〈blank〉” and “x is 〈something〉”
respectively, then the predicate logic expression
(∀x)(P(x) →Q(x))
translates as “For all x,ifx is 〈blank〉, then x is 〈something〉.” Put more
simply, “All x’swith property 〈blank〉 must have property 〈something〉,” or</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 33 — #33
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.3 Predicate Logic 33
even simpler, “All 〈blanks〉 are 〈something〉.” In the domain of all people, if
R(x) stands for “x isrich” and B(x) stands for “x isa baseball player,” then
(∀x)(B(x) →R(x))
is the statement “All baseball players are rich.”
The second construction is of the form
There isa 〈blank〉 that is 〈something〉.
For example, “There isa rich baseball player,” or “There isa funny-tasting
oyster.” This expression has the following form in predicate logic.
(∃x)(P(x)∧Q(x))
Note that thistranslatesliterally as“There issome x such that x is 〈blank〉 and
x is 〈something〉,” which is what we want. In the domain of shellﬁsh, if O(x)is
the predicate “x isan oyster” and F(x) isthe predicate “x tastes funny,” then
(∃x)(F(x)∧O(x))
would translate as “There is a funny-tasting oyster.” Note that you could also
say “There is an oyster that tastes funny,” “Some oysters taste funny,” or,
more awkwardly, “There is a funny-tasting shellﬁsh that is an oyster.” These
statements all mean the same thing.
Exercises 1.3
1. In the domain of integers, let P(x,y) be the predicate “x·y = 12.” Tell
whether each of the following statementsistrue or false.
(a) P(3,4)
(b) P(3,5)
(c) P(2,6)∨P(3,7)
(d) (∀x)(∀y)(P(x,y) →P(y,x))
(e) (∀x)(∃y)P(x,y)
2. In the domain of all penguins, let D(x) be the predicate “x isdanger-
ous.” Translate the following quantiﬁed statements into simple, everyday
English.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 34 — #34
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
34 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
(a) (∀x)D(x)
(b) (∃x)D(x)
(c) ¬(∃x)D(x)
(d) (∃x)¬D(x)
3. In the domain of all movies, let V(x) be the predicate “x isviolent.”
Write the following statements in the symbols of predicate logic.
(a) Some moviesare violent.
(b) Some moviesare not violent.
(c) No moviesare violent.
(d) All moviesare violent.
4. In the domain of all books, consider the following predicates.
H(x)=“x isheavy.”
C(x)=“x isconfusing.”
Translate the following statements in predicate logic into ordinary En-
glish.
(a) (∀x)(H(x) →C(x))
(b) (∃x)(C(x)∧H(x))
(c) (∀x)(C(x)∨H(x))
(d) (∃x)(H(x)∧¬C(x))
5. The domain of the following predicatesisthe set of all plants.
P(x)=“x is poisonous.”
Q(x) = “Jeﬀ haseaten x.”
Translate the following statements into predicate logic.
(a) Some plants are poisonous.
(b) Jeﬀ hasnever eaten a poisonousplant.
(c) There are some nonpoisonous plants that Jeﬀ has never eaten.
6. In the domain of nonzero integers, let I(x,y) be the predicate “x/y isan
integer.” Determine whether the following statements are true or false,
and explain why.
(a) (∀y)(∃x)I(x,y)
(b) (∃x)(∀y)I(x,y)</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 35 — #35
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.3 Predicate Logic 35
7. The domain of the following predicatesisthe set of all traderswho work
at the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
P(x,y)=“x makesmore money than y.”
Q(x,y)=“xnegationslash= y”
Translate the following predicate logic statements into ordinary,every-
day English. (Don’t simply give a word-for-word translation; try to write
sentences that make sense.)
(a) (∀x)(∃y)P(x,y)
(b) (∃y)(∀x)(Q(x,y) →P(x,y))
(c) Which statement is impossible in this context? Why?
8. Translate the following statements into predicate logic using the two com-
mon constructions in Section 1.3.5. State what your predicates are, along
with the domain of each.
(a) All natural numbersare integers.
(b) Some integersare natural numbers.
(c) All the streets in Cozumel, Mexico are one-way.
(d) Some streets in London don’t have modern curb cuts.
9. Write the following statements in predicate logic. Deﬁne what your pred-
icates are. Use the domain of all quadrilaterals.
(a) All rhombuses are parallelograms.
(b) Some parallelograms are not rhombuses.
10. Let the following predicatesbe given. The domain isall people.
R(x)=“x isrude.”
¬R(x)=“x ispleasant.”
C(x)=“x isa child.”
(a) Write the following statement in predicate logic.
There isat least one rude child.
(b) Formally negate your statement from part (a).
(c) Write the English translation of your negated statement.
11. In the domain of all people, consider the following predicate.
P(x,y)=“x needsto love y.”</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 36 — #36
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
36 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
(a) Write the statement “Everybody needs somebody to love” in predi-
cate logic.
(b) Formally negate your statement from part (a).
(c) Write the English translation of your negated statement.
12. The domain for this problem is some unspeciﬁed collection of numbers.
Consider the predicate
P(x,y)=“x isgreater than y.”
(a) Translate the following statement into predicate logic.
Every number hasa number that isgreater than it.
(b) Negate your expression from part (a), and simplify it so that no
quantiﬁer lieswithin the scope of a negation.
(c) Translate your expression from part (b) into understandable English.
Don’t use variables in your English translation.
13. Any equation or inequality with variablesin it isa predicate in the domain
of real numbers. For each of the following statements, tell whether the
statement is true or false.
(a) (∀x)(x
2
>x)
(b) (∃x)(x
2
−2=1)
(c) (∃x)(x
2
+2=1)
(d) (∀x)(∃y)(x
2
+y =4)
(e) (∃y)(∀x)(x
2
+y =4)
14. The domain of the following predicatesisall integersgreater than 1.
P(x)=“x isprime.”
Q(x,y)=“x divides y.”
Consider the following statement.
For every x that isnot prime, there issome prime y that divides
it.
(a) Write the statement in predicate logic.
(b) Formally negate the statement.
(c) Write the English translation of your negated statement.
15. Write the following statement in predicate logic, and negate it. Say what
your predicatesare, along with the domains.
Let x and y be real numbers. If x isrational and y isirrational,
then x+y isirrational.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 37 — #37
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.3 Predicate Logic 37
16. Refer to Example 1.14.
(a) Give the reasons for each ⇔ step in the simpliﬁcation of the formal
negation of statement (2).
(b) Give the formal negation of statement (1). Simplify your answer so
that no quantiﬁer lies within the scope of a negation. Translate your
negated statement back into English.
(c) Give the formal negation of statement (3). Simplify your answer.
Translate your negated statement back into English.
17. Let the following predicatesbe given in the domain of all triangles.
R(x)=“x isa right triangle.”
B(x)=“x hasan obtuse angle.”
Consider the following statements.
S
1
= ¬(∃x)(R(x)∧B(x))
S
2
=(∀x)(R(x) →¬B(x))
(a) Write a proof sequence to show that S
1
⇔S
2
.
(b) Write S
1
in ordinary English.
(c) Write S
2
in ordinary English.
18. Let the following predicatesbe given. The domain isall computer science
classes.
I(x)=“x isinteresting.”
U(x)=“x isuseful.”
H(x,y)=“x isharder than y.”
M(x,y)=“x hasmore studentsthan y.”
(a) Write the following statements in predicate logic.
i. All interesting CS classes are useful.
ii. There are some useful CS classes that are not interesting.
iii. Every interesting CS class has more students than any non-
interesting CS class.
(b) Write the following predicate logic statement in everyday English.
Don’t just give a word-for-word translation; your sentence should
make sense.
(∃x)[I(x)∧(∀y)(H(x,y) →M(y,x))]</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 38 — #38
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
38 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
(c) Formally negate the statement from part (b). Simplify your negation
so that no quantiﬁer lies within the scope of a negation. State which
derivation rulesyou are using.
(d) Give a translation of your negated statement in everyday English.
19. Let the following predicatesbe given. The domain isall cars.
F(x)=“x isfast.”
S(x)=“x isa sportscar.”
E(x)=“x isexpensive.”
A(x,y)=“x issafer than y.”
(a) Write the following statements in predicate logic.
i. All sports cars are fast.
ii. There are fast cars that aren’t sports cars.
iii. Every fast sports car is expensive.
(b) Write the following predicate logic statement in everyday English.
Don’t just give a word-for-word translation; your sentence should
make sense.
(∀x)[S(x) → (∃y)(E(y)∧A(y,x))]
(c) Formally negate the statement from part (b). Simplify your negation
so that no quantiﬁer lies within the scope of a negation. State which
derivation rulesyou are using.
(d) Give a translation of your negated statement in everyday English.
20. (a) Give an example of a pair of predicates P(x) and Q(x) in some
domain to show that the ∃ quantiﬁer doesnot distribute over the ∧
connective. That is, give an example to show that the statements
(∃x)(P(x)∧Q(x)) and (∃x)P(x)∧(∃x)Q(x)
are not logically equivalent.
(b) It istrue, however, that ∃ distributes over ∨. That is,
(∃x)(P(x)∨Q(x)) ⇔ (∃x)P(x)∨(∃x)Q(x)
isan equivalence rule for predicate logic. Verify that your example
from part (a) satisﬁes this equivalence.
21. (a) Give an example to show that ∀ doesnot distribute over ∨.
(b) It isa fact that ∀ distributes over ∧. Check that your example from
part (a) satisﬁes this equivalence rule.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 39 — #39
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.4 Logic in Mathematics 39
1.4 LogicinMathematics
There is much more that we could say about symbolic logic; we have only
scratched the surface. But we have developed enough tools to help us think
carefully about the typesof language mathematiciansuse. Thissection provides
an overview of the basic mathematical “parts of speech.”
Most mathematicstextbooks(including thisone) label important state-
mentswith a heading, such as“Theorem,” “Deﬁnition,” or “Proof.” The name
of each statement describes the role it plays in the logical development of the
subject. Therefore it is important to understand the meanings of these diﬀerent
statement labels.
1.4.1 TheRoleofDeﬁnitionsinMathematics
When we call a statement a “deﬁnition” in mathematics, we mean something
diﬀerent from the usual everyday notion. Everyday deﬁnitions are descriptive.
The thing being deﬁned already exists, and the purpose of the deﬁnition is to
describe the thing. When a dictionary deﬁnes some term, it is characterizing
the way the term iscommonly used. For example, if we looked up the deﬁnition
of “mortadella” in the OxfordEnglishDictionary (OED), we would read the
following.
Any of several types of Italian (esp. Bolognese) sausage; (now) spec.
a thick smooth-textured pork sausage containing pieces of fat and
typically served in slices.
The authors of the OED have done their best to describe what is meant by the
term “mortadella.” A good dictionary deﬁnition isone that doesa good job
describing something.
In mathematics, by contrast, a deﬁnition is a statement that stipulates
the meaning of a new term, symbol, or object. For example, a plane geometry
textbook may deﬁne parallel linesasfollows.
Deﬁnition 1.4 Two linesare parallel if they have no pointsin common.
The job of this deﬁnition is not to describe parallel lines, but rather to specify
exactly what we mean when we use the word “parallel.” Once parallel lines
have been deﬁned in thisway, the statement “ l and m are parallel” means“l
and m have no pointsin common.” We may have some intuitive idea of what l
and m might look like (e.g., they must run in the same direction), but for the
purposes of any future arguments, the only thing we really know about l and
m isthat they don’t intersect each other.
In a sense, a mathematical deﬁnition calls into being the object it deﬁnes.
Without a deﬁnition of parallel lines, there can be no mathematical discussion
of parallel lines. A dictionary deﬁnition, by contrast, doesn’t create anything</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 40 — #40
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
40 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
new; we don’t imagine that the writers of the OED are in the business of making
sausage (and everything else, for that matter).
Why isthisdistinction important? It meansthat the whole meaning of a
mathematical statement dependson the deﬁnitionsof the termsinvolved. If you
don’t understand a mathematical statement, start looking at the deﬁnitions
of all the terms. These deﬁnitions stipulate the meanings of the terms. The
statement won’t make sense without them.
For example, suppose we want to state and prove some facts about even and
odd numbers. We already know what even and odd numbers are; we all come
to this task with a previously learnedconceptimage of “even” and “odd.” Our
concept image iswhat we think of when we hear the term: an even number ends
in an even digit, an odd number can’t be divided in half evenly, “2, 4, 6, 8; who
do we appreciate,” etc. When writing mathematically, however, it isimportant
not to rely too heavily on these concept images. Any mathematical statement
about even and odd numbersderivesitsmeaning from from deﬁnitions. We
specify these as follows.
Deﬁnition 1.5 An integer n is even if n =2k for some integer k.
Deﬁnition 1.6 An integer n is odd if n =2k + 1 for some integer k.
Given these deﬁnitions, we can justify the statement “17 is odd” by noting that
17=2·8+1. In fact, this equation is precisely the meaning of the statement that
“17 isodd;” there issome integer k (in thiscase, k = 8) such that 17 = 2k+1.
You already “knew” that 17 isodd, but in order to mathematically prove that
17 isodd, you need to use the deﬁnition.
Mathematical deﬁnitions must be extremely precise, and this can make
them somewhat limited. Often our concept image contains much more infor-
mation than the deﬁnition supplies. For example, we probably all agree that it
is impossible for a number to be both even and odd, but this fact doesn’t follow
immediately from Deﬁnitions 1.5 and 1.6. To say that some given number n
iseven meansthat n =2k
1
for some integer k
1
, and to say that it is odd is
to say that n =2k
2
+ 1 for some integer k
2
. (Note that k
1
and k
2
may be
diﬀerent.) Now, isthispossible? It would imply that 2 k
1
=2k
2
+1, which says
that 1 = 2(k
1
−k
2
), showing that 1 is even, by Deﬁnition 1.5. At this point we
might object that 1 isodd, so it can’t be even, but thisreasoning iscircular: we
were trying to show that a number cannot be both even and odd. We haven’t
yet shown this fact, so we can’t use this fact in our argument. It turns out that
Deﬁnitions1.5 and 1.6 alone are not enough to show that a number can’t be
both even and odd; to do so requires more facts about integers, as we will see
in Section 1.5.
One reasonable objection to the above discussion is that our deﬁnition of
odd integerswastoo limiting; why not deﬁne an odd integer to be an integer</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 41 — #41
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.4 Logic in Mathematics 41
that isn’t even? This is certainly permissible, but then it would be hard
4
to
show that an odd integer n can be written as2k +1 for some integer k. And we
can’t have two deﬁnitions for the same term. Stipulating a deﬁnition usually
involvesa choice on the part of the author, but once thischoice ismade, we
are stuck with it. We have chosen to deﬁne odd integers as in Deﬁnition 1.6, so
thisiswhat we mean when we say “odd.”
Since deﬁnitions are stipulative, they are logically “if and only if” state-
ments. However, it iscommon to write deﬁnitionsin the form
[Object] x is[deﬁned term] if [deﬁning property about x].
The foregoing examplesall take thisform. In predicate logic, if
D(x)=x is[deﬁned term]
P(x) = [deﬁning property about x]
then the above deﬁnition really meansthe following.
(∀x)(P(x) ↔D(x))
However, thisisnot what the deﬁnition saysat face value. Deﬁnitionslook like
“if ...then” statements, but we interpret them as “if and only if” statements
because they are deﬁnitions. For example, Deﬁnition 1.4 is stipulating the prop-
erty that deﬁnes all parallel lines, not just a property some parallel lines might
have. Strictly speaking, we really should use “if and only if” instead of “if” in
our deﬁnitions. But the use of “if” is so widespread that most mathematicians
would ﬁnd a deﬁnition like
Two linesare parallel if and only if they have no pointsin common.
awkward to read. Since thisstatement isa deﬁnition, it isredundant to say “if
and only if.”
1.4.2 OtherTypesofMathematicalStatements
Deﬁnitionsare a crucial part of mathematics, but there are other kindsof
statements that occur frequently in mathematical writing. Any mathematical
system needs to start with some assumptions. Without any statements to build
on, we would never be able to prove any new statements. Statements that
are assumed without proof are called postulates or axioms. For example, the
following is a standard axiom about the natural numbers.
If n isa natural number, so is n+1.
4. Actually, it would be impossible, without further information.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 42 — #42
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
42 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
Axiomsare typically very basic, fundamental statementsabout the objectsthey
describe. Any theorem in mathematics is based on the assumption of some set
of underlying axioms. So to say theorems are “true” is not to say they are true
in any absolute sense, only that they are true, given that some speciﬁed set of
axiomsistrue.
Atheorem is a statement that follows logically from statements we have al-
ready established or taken as given. Before a statement can be called a theorem,
we must be able to prove it. Aproof is a valid argument, based on axioms, deﬁ-
nitions, and proven theorems, that demonstrates the truth of a statement. The
derivation sequences that we did in Section 1.2 were very basic mathematical
proofs. We will see more interesting examples of proofs in the next section.
We also use the termslemma,proposition, andcorollary to refer to speciﬁc
kinds of theorems. Usually authors will label a result a lemma if they are using
it to prove another result. Some authors make no distinction between a theorem
and a proposition, but the latter often refers to a result that is perhaps not
assigniﬁcant asa full-ﬂedged theorem. A corollary isa theorem that follows
immediately from another result via a short argument.
One last word on terminology: A statement that we intend to prove is
called aclaim. A statement that we can’t yet prove but that we suspect is true
iscalled a conjecture.
1.4.3 Counterexamples
Often mathematical statements are of the form
(∀x)P(x). (1.4.1)
We saw in the previous section that the negation of statement 1.4.1 is
(∃x)¬P(x). (1.4.2)
So either statement 1.4.1 is true, or statement 1.4.2 is true, but not both. If
we can ﬁnd a single value for x that makes ¬P(x) true, then we know that
statement 1.4.2 is true, and therefore we also know that statement 1.4.1 is
false.
For example, we might be tempted to make the following statement.
Every prime number isodd. (1.4.3)
But 2 isan example of a prime number that isnot odd, so statement 1.4.3 is
false. A particular value that shows a statement to be false is called a coun-
terexample to the statement.
Another common logical form in mathematics is the universal if–then state-
ment.
(∀x)(P(x) →Q(x))</p>
      <p><![CDATA[✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 43 — #43
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.4 Logic in Mathematics 43
To ﬁnd a counterexample to a statement of this form, we need to ﬁnd some x
that satisﬁes the negation
(∃x)¬(P(x) →Q(x)).
This last statement is equivalent (using implication and De Morgan’s law) to
(∃x)(P(x)∧¬Q(x)).
So a counterexample is something that satisﬁes P and violates Q.
Example 1.15 Find a counterexample to the following statement.
For all sequences of numbers a
1
,a
2
,a
3
,...,ifa
1
<a
2
<a
3
< ···,
then some a
i
must be positive.
Solution: By the above discussion, we need an example of a sequence that
satisﬁes the “if” part of the statement and violates the “then” part. In other
words, we need to ﬁnd an increasing sequence that is always negative. Some-
thing with a horizontal asymptote will work: a
n
= −1/n isone example. Note
that −1 <−1/2 <−1/3 <···, but all the termsare lessthan zero. ♦
1.4.4 AxiomaticSystems
In rigorous, modern treatments of mathematics, any system (e.g., plane geom-
etry, the real numbers) must be clearly and unambiguously deﬁned from the
start. The deﬁnitions should leave nothing to intuition; they mean what they
say and nothing more. It is important to be clear about the assumptions, or ax-
ioms, for the system. Every theorem in the system must be proved with a valid
argument, using only the deﬁnitions, axioms, and previously proved theorems
of the system.
This sounds good, but it is actually impossible. It is impossible because
we can’t deﬁne everything; before we write the ﬁrst deﬁnition we have to have
some words in our vocabulary. These starting words are calledundeﬁnedterms.
An undeﬁned term hasno meaning—it isan abstraction—itsmeaning comes
from the role it plays in the axioms of the system. A collection of undeﬁned
termsand axiomsiscalled an axiomaticsystem.
Axiomatic systems for familiar mathematics such as plane geometry and
the real number system are actually quite complicated and beyond the scope
of an introductory course. Here we will look at some very simple axiomatic
systems to get a feel for how they work. This will also give us some experience
with logic in mathematics.
The ﬁrst example deﬁnes a “ﬁnite geometry,” that is, a system for geometry
with a ﬁnite number of points. Although this system speaks of “points” and]]></p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 44 — #44
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
44 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
“lines,” these terms don’t mean the same thing they meant in high school
geometry. In fact, these terms don’t mean anything at all, to begin with at
least. The only thing we know about points and lines is that they satisfy the
given axioms.
Example 1.16 Axiomatic system for a four-point geometry.
Undeﬁnedterms: point, line, ison
Axioms:
1. For every pair of distinct points x and y, there isa unique line
such that x ison l and y ison l.
2. Given a line l and a point x that isnot on l, there isa unique
line m such that x ison m and no point on l isalso on m.
3. There are exactly four points.
4. It is impossible for three points to be on the same line.
Notice that these axioms use terms from logic in addition to the undeﬁned
terms. We are also using numbers (“four” and “three”), even though we haven’t
deﬁned an axiomatic system for the natural numbers. In this case, our use of
numbersismore a convenient shorthand than anything; we aren’t relying on
any propertiesof the natural numberssuch asaddition, ordering, divisibility,
etc.
It is common to use an existing system to deﬁne a new axiomatic system.
For example, some modern treatments of plane geometry use axioms that rely
on the real number system. The axioms in Example 1.16 use constructions from
predicate logic. In any event, these prerequisite systems can also be deﬁned
axiomatically, so systems that use them are still fundamentally axiomatic.
Deﬁnitions can help make an axiomatic system more user-friendly. In the
four-point geometry of Example 1.16, we could make the following deﬁnitions.
In these (and other) deﬁnitions, the word being deﬁned is in italics.
Deﬁnition 1.7 A line lpassesthrough a point x if x ison l.
Deﬁnition 1.7 givesusa convenient alternative to using the undeﬁned
term “is on.” For example, in the ﬁrst axiom, it is a bit awkward to say
“x ison l and y ison l,” but Deﬁnition 1.7 allowsusto rephrase thisas“ l
passes through x and y.” The deﬁnition doesn’t add any new features to the
system; it just helps us describe things more easily. This is basically what any
deﬁnition in mathematics does. The following deﬁnition is a slight restatement
of Deﬁnition 1.4, modiﬁed to ﬁt the terminology of this system.
Deﬁnition 1.8 Two lines, l and m, are parallel if there isno point x, such
that x ison l and x ison m.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 45 — #45
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.4 Logic in Mathematics 45
Now we could rephrase the second axiom of Example 1.16 as follows.
2. Given a line l and a point x that isnot on l, there isa unique
line m passing through x such that m isparallel to l.
A simple theorem and proof would look like this.
Theorem 1.1 IntheaxiomaticsystemofExample1.16,thereareatleasttwo
distinctlines.
Proof By Axiom 3, there are distinct points x, y, and z. By Axiom 1, there
isa line l
1
through x and y, and a line l
2
through y and z. By Axiom 4, x, y,
and z are not on the same line, so l
1
and l
2
must be distinct lines. square
A model of an axiomatic system is an interpretation in some context in
which all the undeﬁned termshave meaningsand all the axiomshold. Models
are important because they show that it is possible for all the axioms to be
true, at least in some context. And any theorem that follows from the axioms
must also be true for any valid model.
Let’s make a model for the system in Example 1.16. Let a “point” be a
dot, and let a “line” be a simple closed loop. A point “is on” a line if the dot is
inside the loop. Figure 1.3 showsthismodel. Check that all the axiomshold.
Thismodel doesn’t really match our concept image of pointsand linesin
ordinary geometry, but it’s still a valid model. In an axiomatic system, the
propertiesof the objectsare determined by the axiomsand described by the
theoremsand deﬁnitions. We may think we know what pointsand linesshould
look like, but mathematically speaking we only know whatever we can prove
about them. In the exercises you will construct a more intuitive model for this
system.
The mathematician David Hilbert (1862–1943) was largely responsible for
developing the modern approach to axiomatics. Hilbert, reﬂecting on the
Figure 1.3 A model for the axiomatic system in Example 1.16 using dots
and loops.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 46 — #46
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
46 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
abstract nature of axiomatic systems, remarked, “Instead of points, lines, and
planes, one must be able to say at all times tables, chairs, and beer mugs” [24].
If we used a word processor to replace every occurrence of “point” with “table”
and every occurrence of “line” with “chair” in the above axioms, deﬁnitions,
theorem, and proof, the theorem would still hold, and the proof would still be
valid.
The next example is referred to in the exercises. The choice of undeﬁned
terms emphasizes that these terms, by themselves, carry no meaning.
Example 1.17 Badda-Bing axiomatic system.
Undeﬁnedterms: badda, bing, hit
Axioms:
1. Every badda hitsexactly four bings.
2. Every bing ishit by exactly two baddas.
3. If x and y are distinct baddas, each hitting bing q, then there
are no other bingshit by both x and y.
4. There isat least one bing.
One possible model for the Badda-Bing system is shown in Figure 1.4. The
picture shows an inﬁnite collection of squares; the central square connects to
Figure 1.4 A fractal model for the Badda-Bing geometry.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 47 — #47
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.4 Logic in Mathematics 47
four other squares whose sides are half as long. Each of these squares connects
to three other smaller squares, and each of those connects to three others, and
so on. Thisisan example of a fractal—a shape with some sort of inﬁnitely
repetitive geometric structure. (We’ll say more about fractals in Chapter 3.)
In thismodel, a “badda” isa square, and a “bing” isa corner, or vertex,
of a square. A square “hits” a vertex if the vertex belongs to the square. Since
every square has four vertices, Axiom 1 is satisﬁed. Axiom 2 holds because
every vertex in the model belongs to exactly two squares. Axiom 3 is a little
harder to see: if squares x and y share a vertex q, there isno way they can
share another vertex. And Axiom 4 is obviously true—there are lots of bings.
Exercises 1.4
1. Look up the word “root” in a dictionary. It should have several diﬀerent
deﬁnitions. Find a deﬁnition that is (a) descriptive and another deﬁnition
that is(b) stipulative.
2. Find another word in the English language that has both descriptive and
stipulative deﬁnitions.
3. Use Deﬁnition 1.5 to explain why 104 is an even integer.
4. Let n be an integer. Use Deﬁnition 1.6 to explain why 2n+ 7 isan odd
integer.
5. Let n
1
and n
2
be even integers.
(a) Use Deﬁnition 1.5 to write n
1
and n
2
in termsof integersk
1
and k
2
,
respectively.
(b) Write the product n
1
n
2
in termsof k
1
and k
2
. Simplify your answer.
(c) Write the sum n
1
+n
2
in termsof k
1
and k
2
. Simplify your answer.
6. There are several diﬀerent modelsfor geometriesin which the pointsare
ordered pairs( x,y) of real numbers; we plot these points in the usual
way in the xy-plane. In such a geometry, there can be a formula for
the distance between two points(x
1
,y
1
) and (x
2
,y
2
). For example, in
Euclidean geometry, distance is given by the usual Euclidean distance
formula:
Distance =
radicalbig
(x
2
−x
1
)
2
+(y
2
−y
1
)
2
In any geometry with a distance formula, we can deﬁne acircle asfollows.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 48 — #48
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
48 Chapter 1 a73 Logical Thinking
Deﬁnition 1.9 A circle centered at (a,b) with radius r isthe collection
of all points( x,y) whose distance from (a,b)isr.
(a) Use Deﬁnition 1.9 to give an equation for the circle with radius 5
centered at (0,0) in the Euclidean plane.
(b) Plot the circle from part (a) in the xy-plane.
(c) In the Taxicabgeometry, the distance between two points (x
1
,y
1
)
and (x
2
,y
2
) isgiven by the following formula.
Distance = |x
2
−x
1
|+|y
2
−y
1
|
(This is called “taxicab” distance because it models the distance you
would have to travel if you were restricted to driving on a rectangular
city grid.) In thismodel, use Deﬁnition 1.9 to plot the “circle” with
radius5 centered at (0 ,0).
(d) Which type of circle (Euclidean or taxicab) agreeswith your concept
image of circle?
7. Consider the domain of all quadrilaterals. Let
A(x)=“x hasfour right angles.”
R(x)=“x isa rectangle.”
Write the meaning of each mathematical statement in predicate logic,
keeping in mind the logical distinction between deﬁnitions and theorems.
(a) Deﬁnition. A quadrilateral isa rectangle if it hasfour right angles.
(b) Theorem. A quadrilateral isa rectangle if it hasfour right angles.
8. Write Deﬁnition 1.5 in predicate logic. Use the predicate E(x)=“x is
even” in the domain of integers.
9. Let the following statements be given.
Deﬁnition. A triangle isscalene if all of itssideshave diﬀerent
lengths.
Theorem. A triangle isscalene if it isa right triangle that is
not isosceles.
Suppose triangleABC is a scalene triangle. Which of the following conclusions
are valid? Why or why not?
(a) All of the sides of triangleABC have diﬀerent lengths.
(b) triangleABC is a right triangle that is not isosceles.</p>
      <p>✐
✐
“48927˙CH01˙Hunter” — 2008/10/15 — 5:01 — page 49 — #49
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
✐
1.4 Logic in Mathematics 49
10. What isthe diﬀerence between an axiom and a theorem?
11. Let P(n,x,y,z) be the predicate “x
n
+y
n
= z
n
.”
(a) Write the following statement in predicate logic, using positive inte-
gersasthe domain.
For every positive integer n, there exist positive integers x,
y, and z such that x
n
+y
n
= z
n
.
(b) Formally negate your predicate logic statement from part (a). Sim-
plify so that no quantiﬁer lies within the scope of a negation.
(c) In order to produce a counterexample to the statement in part (a),
what, speciﬁcally, would you have to ﬁnd?
12. Find a counterexample for each statement.
(a) If n isprime, then 2
n
−1 isprime.
(b) Every triangle has at least one obtuse angle.
5
(c) For all real numbers x, x
2
≥x.
(d) For every positive nonprime integer n, if some prime p divides n,
then some other prime q (with q negationslash= p) also divides n.
(e) If all the sides of a quadrilateral are equal, then the diagonals of the
quadrilateral are equal.
(f) For every real number N>0, there issome real number x such that
Nx>x.
(g) Let l, m, and n be linesin the plane. If l ⊥m and n intersect l, then
n intersects m.
(h) If p isprime, then p
2
+ 4 isprime.
13. Which of the statementsin the previousproblem can be proved astheo-
rems?
14. Consider the following theorem.
Theorem. Let x be a wamel. If x hasbeen schlumpfed, then
x isa borﬁn.
Answer the following questions.
(a) Give the converse of this theorem.
(b) Give the contrapositive of this theorem.
(c) Which statement, (a) or (b), is logically equivalent to the Theorem?
5. An angle is obtuse if it has measure greater than 90
◦
.</p>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>