<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:ops="http://www.w3.org/2007/ops" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xml:lang="en">

<head>
<link href="pdlmsr.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
<title>Begin Reading</title>
</head>
<body>
<div class="chapter">
<p class="para">&ldquo;And he wants Christine to sing Iodine tonight! She&rsquo;s got a voice like a whistle!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella raised his eyebrows. &ldquo;That at least is not a problem, is it?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it? It&rsquo;s a key role!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella put his arm around the owner&rsquo;s shoulders. &ldquo;I think perhaps it is time for you to explore a few more little-known corners of the wonderful world that is opera,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The stagecoach rolled to a halt in Sator Square, Ankh-Morpork. The coach agent was waiting impatiently.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re fifteen hours late, Mr. Reever!&rdquo; he shouted.</p>

<p class="para">The coach driver nodded impassively. He laid the reins down, jumped off the box, and inspected the horses. There was a certain woodenness about his movements.</p>

<p class="para">Passengers were grabbing their baggage and hurrying away.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well?&rdquo; said the agent.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We had a picnic,&rdquo; said the coach driver. His face was gray.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You stopped for a <span class="italic">picnic</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And a bit of a singsong,&rdquo; said the driver, pulling the horses&rsquo; feed bags from under the seat.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You are telling me that you stopped the mail coach for a picnic and a singsong?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, and the cat got stuck up a tree.&rdquo; He sucked his hand, and the agent noticed that a handkerchief was tied around it.</p>

<p class="para">A hazy look of recollection clouded the driver&rsquo;s <a id="page114"></a>eyes. &ldquo;And then there were the stories,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What stories?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The little fat one said everyone had to tell a story to help pass the time.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes? Well? I don&rsquo;t see how that could slow you down!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You should&rsquo;ve heard <span class="italic">her</span> story. The one about the very tall man and the piano? I was so embarrassed I fell off the coach. I wouldn&rsquo;t use words like that even to my own dear grandmother!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And of course,&rdquo; said the agent, who prided himself on his ironic approach, &ldquo;the word <span class="italic">timetable</span> never crossed your mind while all this was going on?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The driver turned to look directly at him for the first time. The agent took a step back. Here was a man who had hang-glided over Hell.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">You</span> tell them,&rdquo; said the driver, and walked away.</p>

<p class="para">The agent stared after him, and then walked around to the door.</p>

<p class="para">A small man with a hunted look climbed out, dragging a huge fat man behind him and gabbling urgently in a language the agent didn&rsquo;t understand.</p>

<p class="para">And then the agent was left alone with a coach and horses and an expanding circle of hurrying passengers.</p>

<p class="para">He opened the door and peered inside.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good morning, mister,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">He looked, in some puzzlement, from her to Granny Weatherwax.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Is everything all right, ladies?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Very nice journey,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg, taking his arm. &ldquo;We shall def&rsquo;nitly patronize you another time.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page115"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The driver seemed to think there was a problem&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Problem?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t notice any problems. Did you, Gytha?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He could&rsquo;ve been a bit quicker fetching the ladder,&rdquo; said Nanny, climbing down. &ldquo;And I&rsquo;m sure he muttered something under his breath that time we stopped to admire the view. But I&rsquo;m prepared to be gracious about it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You stopped to admire the <span class="italic">view</span>?&rdquo; said the agent. &ldquo;When?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, several times,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;No sense in rushing around the whole time, is there? More haste less speed, etcetera. Could you point us in the direction of Elm Street? Only we&rsquo;ve lodgings at Mrs. Palm&rsquo;s. Our Nev speaks highly of the place, he says no one ever looked for him there&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The agent stepped back, as people generally did in the face of Nanny&rsquo;s pump-action chatter.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Elm Street?&rdquo; he stuttered. &ldquo;But&hellip;<span class="italic">respectable</span> ladies shouldn&rsquo;t go there&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny patted him on the shoulder. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s good,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;That way we won&rsquo;t run into anyone we know.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">As Granny walked past the horses they tried to hide behind the coach.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Bucket smiled brightly. There were little beads of sweat around the edges of his face.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah, Perdita,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Do sit down, lass. Er. You are enjoying your time with us so far?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, thank you, Mr. Bucket,&rdquo; said Agnes dutifully.</p>
<a id="page116"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good. That&rsquo;s good. Isn&rsquo;t that good, Mr. Salzella? Don&rsquo;t you think that&rsquo;s good, Dr. Undershaft?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes looked at the three worried faces.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;re all very pleased,&rdquo; said Mr. Bucket. &ldquo;And, er, well, we have an <span class="italic">amazing</span> offer for you which I&rsquo;m sure will help you to enjoy it <span class="italic">even more</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes watched the assembled faces. &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo; she said guardedly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I know you, er, have only been with us hardly any time but we have decided to, er&rdquo;&mdash;Bucket swallowed, and glanced at the other two for moral support&mdash;&ldquo;let you sing the part of Iodine in tonight&rsquo;s production of <span class="italic">La Triviata</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Um. It isn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">the</span> major role but of course it does include the famous &lsquo;Departure&rsquo; aria&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh. Yes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;there is, er&hellip;that is, er&hellip;&rdquo; Bucket gave up and looked helplessly at his director of music. &ldquo;Mr. Salzella?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella leaned forward. &ldquo;What in fact we would like you to do&hellip;Perdita&hellip;is <span class="italic">sing</span> the role, indeed, but not, in fact&hellip;<span class="italic">play</span> the role.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes listened while they explained. She&rsquo;d stand in the chorus, just behind Christine. Christine would be told to sing very softly. It had been done dozens of times before, Salzella explained. It was done far more often than the audiences ever realized&mdash;when singers had a sore throat, or had completely dried, or had turned up so drunk they could barely stand, or, in one notorious instance many years previously, had died in the interval and subsequently sung their famous aria by means of a broom handle stuck up their back and their jaw operated with a piece of string.</p>
<a id="page117"></a>

<p class="para">It wasn&rsquo;t immoral. The show had to go on.</p>

<p class="para">The ring of desperately grinning faces watched her.</p>

<p class="para">I could just walk away, she thought. Walk away from these grinning faces and the mysterious Ghost. They couldn&rsquo;t stop me.</p>

<p class="para">But there&rsquo;s nowhere to walk to except back.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, er, yes,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m very&hellip;er&hellip;but why do it like this? Couldn&rsquo;t I simply take her place and sing the part?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The men looked at one another, and then all started talking at once.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but you see, Christine is&hellip;has&hellip;more stage experience&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;technical grasp&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;stage presence&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;apparent lyrical ability&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;fits the costume&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes looked down at her big hands. She could feel the blush advancing like a barbarian horde, burning everything as it came.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We would like you, as it were,&rdquo; said Bucket, &ldquo;to <span class="italic">ghost</span> the part&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ghost?&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a stage term,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, I see,&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;Yes. Well, of course. I shall certainly do my best.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Jolly</span> good,&rdquo; said Bucket. &ldquo;We won&rsquo;t forget this. And I&rsquo;m certain a very suitable part for you will come along very soon. See Dr. Undershaft this afternoon and he will take you through the role.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er. I know it quite well, I think,&rdquo; said Agnes, uncertainly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really? How?&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page118"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been&hellip;taking lessons.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That <span class="italic">is</span> good, lass,&rdquo; said Mr. Bucket. &ldquo;Shows keenness. We&rsquo;re very impressed. But see Dr. Undershaft in any case&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes got up and, still looking down, trooped out.</p>

<p class="para">Undershaft sighed and shook his head.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Poor child,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Born too late. Opera <span class="italic">used</span> to be just about voices. You know, I remember the days of the great sopranos. Dame Violetta Gigli, Dame Clarissa Extendo&hellip;whatever became of them, I sometimes wonder.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Didn&rsquo;t the climate change?&rdquo; said Salzella nastily.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There goes a figure that should prompt a revival of <span class="italic">The Ring of the Nibelungingung</span>,&rdquo; Undershaft went on. &ldquo;Now that <span class="italic">was</span> an opera.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Three days of gods shouting at one another and twenty minutes of memorable tunes?&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;No, thank you very much.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But can&rsquo;t you hear her singing Hildabrun, leader of the Valkyries?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. Oh, yes. But unfortunately I can also hear her singing Nobbo the dwarf and Io, Chief of the Gods.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Those were the days,&rdquo; said Undershaft sadly, shaking his head. &ldquo;We had <span class="italic">proper</span> opera then. I recall when Dame Veritasi stuffed a musician into his own tuba for yawning&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, yes, but this is the Century of the Fruitbat,&rdquo; said Salzella, standing up. He glanced at the door again, and shook his head.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Amazing,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Do you think she knows how fat she is?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>
<a id="page119"></a>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The door of Mrs. Palm&rsquo;s discreet establishment opened at Granny&rsquo;s knock.</p>

<p class="para">The person on the other side was a young woman. Very obviously a young woman. There was no possible way that she could have been mistaken for a young man in any language, especially Braille.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny peered around the young lady&rsquo;s powdered shoulder at the red plush and gilt interior beyond, and then up at Granny Weatherwax&rsquo;s impassive face, and then back at the young lady.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll tan our Nev&rsquo;s hide when I get home,&rdquo; she muttered. &ldquo;Come away, Esme, you don&rsquo;t want to go in there. It&rsquo;d take too long to explain&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why, Granny Weatherwax!&rdquo; said the girl happily. &ldquo;And who&rsquo;s this?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny looked up at Granny, whose expression hadn&rsquo;t changed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Nanny Ogg,&rdquo; Nanny said eventually. &ldquo;Yes, I&rsquo;m Nanny Ogg. Nev&rsquo;s mum,&rdquo; she added darkly. &ldquo;Yes, indeed. Yes. On account of me bein&rsquo; a&rdquo;&mdash;the words &ldquo;respectable widow woman&rdquo; tried to range themselves in her vocal cords, and shriveled at the sheer enormity of the falsehood, forcing her to settle for &ldquo;mother to him. Nev. Yes. Nev&rsquo;s mum.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hello, Colette,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;What fascinatin&rsquo; earrings you are wearing. Is Mrs. Palm at home?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&rsquo;s always at home to <span class="italic">important</span> visitors,&rdquo; said Colette. &ldquo;Do come in, everyone will be so pleased to see you again!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There were cries of welcome as Granny stepped into the scarlet gloom.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What? You&rsquo;ve been here before?&rdquo; said Nanny, eying the pink flesh and white lace that made up much of the scenery.</p>
<a id="page120"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes. Mrs. Palm is an old friend. Practic&rsquo;ly a witch.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&hellip;you do <span class="italic">know</span> what <span class="italic">kind</span> of place this is, do you, Esme?&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg. She felt curiously annoyed. She&rsquo;d happily give way to Granny&rsquo;s expertise in the worlds of mind and magic, but she felt very strongly that there were some more specialized areas that were definitely Ogg territory, and Granny Weatherwax had no business even to know what they were.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes,&rdquo; said Granny, calmly.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny&rsquo;s patience gave out. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a house of ill repute, is what it is!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;On the contrary,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I believe people speak very highly of it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You <span class="italic">knew</span>? And you never told <span class="italic">me</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny raised an ironic eyebrow. &ldquo;The lady who invented the Strawberry Wobbler?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, yes, but&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We all live life the best way we can, Gytha. And there&rsquo;s a lot of people who think <span class="italic">witches</span> are bad.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Before you criticize someone, Gytha, walk a mile in their shoes,&rdquo; said Granny, with a faint smile.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In those shoes <span class="italic">she</span> was wearin&rsquo;, I&rsquo;d twist my ankle,&rdquo; said Nanny, gritting her teeth. &ldquo;I&rsquo;d need a ladder just to get in &rsquo;em.&rdquo; It was infuriating, the way Granny tricked you into reading her half of the dialogue. And opened your mind to yourself in unexpected ways.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And it&rsquo;s a welcoming place and the beds are soft,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>
<a id="page121"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Warm, too, I expect,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg, giving in. &ldquo;And there&rsquo;s always a friendly light in the window.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Dear me, Gytha Ogg. I always thought you were unshockable.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shockable, no,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Easily surprised, yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Dr. Undershaft the chorus master peered at Agnes over the top of his half-moon spectacles.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The, um, &lsquo;Departure&rsquo; aria, as it is known,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;is quite a little masterpiece. Not one of the great operatic highlights, but very memorable nevertheless.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">His eyes misted over. &ldquo;&lsquo;<span class="italic">Questa maledetta</span>&rsquo; sings Iodine, as she tells Peccadillo how hard it is for her to leave him&hellip;&lsquo;<span class="italic">Questa maledetta porta si blocccccca, Si blocca comunque diavolo lo faccccc-cio&hellip;!</span>&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He stopped and made great play of cleaning his glasses with his handkerchief.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;When Gigli sang it, there wasn&rsquo;t a dry eye in the house,&rdquo; he mumbled. &ldquo;I was there. It was then that I decided that I would&hellip;oh, great days, indeed.&rdquo; He put his glasses on and blew his nose.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll run through it once,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;just so that you can understand how it is supposed to go. Very well, Andr&eacute;.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The young man who had been drafted to play the piano in the rehearsal room nodded, and winked surreptitiously at Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">She pretended not to have seen him, and listened with an expression of acute studiousness as the old man worked his way through the score.</p>
<a id="page122"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And now,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;let us see how you manage.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He handed her the score and nodded at the pianist.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes sang the aria, or at least a few bars of it. Andr&eacute; stopped playing and leaned his head against the piano, trying to stifle a laugh.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ahem,&rdquo; said Undershaft.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Was I doing something wrong?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You were singing tenor,&rdquo; said Undershaft, looking sternly at Andr&eacute;.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She was singing in <span class="italic">your</span> voice, sir!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Perhaps you can sing it like, er, Christine would sing it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">They started again.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Kwesta!? Maledetta!!&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Undershaft held up both hands. Andr&eacute;&rsquo;s shoulders were shaking with the effort of not laughing.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, yes. Accurately observed. I dare say you&rsquo;re right. But could we start again and, er, perhaps you would sing it how you think it should be sung?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes nodded.</p>

<p class="para">They started again&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&hellip;and finished.</p>

<p class="para">Undershaft had sat down, half-turned away. He wouldn&rsquo;t look round to face her.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes stood watching him uncertainly. &ldquo;Er. Was that all right?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; the pianist got up slowly and took her hand. &ldquo;I think we&rsquo;d better leave him,&rdquo; he said softly, pulling her toward the door.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Was it that bad?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not&hellip;exactly.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Undershaft raised his head, but didn&rsquo;t turn it toward her. &ldquo;More practice on those <span class="italic">R</span>s, madam, <a id="page123"></a>and strive for greater security above the stave,&rdquo; he said hoarsely.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. Yes, I will.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; led her out into the corridor, shut the door, and then turned to her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That was astounding,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Did you ever hear the great Gigli sing?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t even know who Gigli <span class="italic">is</span>. What was I singing?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You didn&rsquo;t know that either?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what it <span class="italic">means</span>, no.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; looked down at the score in his hand. &ldquo;Well, I&rsquo;m not much good at the language, but I suppose the opening could be sung something like this:</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">This damn door sticks</span></p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">This damn door sticks</span></p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">It sticks no matter what the hell I do</span></p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">It&rsquo;s marked &ldquo;Pull&rdquo; and indeed I am pulling</span></p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">Perhaps it should be marked &ldquo;Push&rdquo;?</span></p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes blinked. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s <span class="italic">it</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But I thought it was supposed to be very moving and romantic!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It <span class="italic">is</span>,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;It <span class="italic">was</span>. This isn&rsquo;t real life, this is <span class="italic">opera</span>. It doesn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">matter</span> what the words mean. It&rsquo;s the feeling that matters. Hasn&rsquo;t anyone told&mdash;? Look, I&rsquo;m in rehearsals for the rest of the afternoon, but perhaps we could meet tomorrow? Perhaps after breakfast?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Oh, no, thought Agnes. Here it comes. The blush was moving inexorably upward. She wondered if one day it might reach her face and carry <a id="page124"></a>on going, so that it ended up as a big pink cloud over her head.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er, yes,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Yes. That would be&hellip;very helpful.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Now I&rsquo;ve got to go.&rdquo; He gave her a weak little smile, and patted her hand. &ldquo;And&hellip;I&rsquo;m really sorry it&rsquo;s happening this way. Because&hellip;that was astounding.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He went to walk away, and then stopped. &ldquo;Uh&hellip;sorry if I frightened you last night,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;On the stairs.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, that. I wasn&rsquo;t frightened.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&hellip;er&hellip;didn&rsquo;t mention it to anyone, did you? I&rsquo;d hate people to think I was worrying over nothing.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hadn&rsquo;t given it another thought, to tell you the truth. I know you can&rsquo;t be the Ghost, if that&rsquo;s what you&rsquo;re worried about. Eh?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Me? The Ghost. Haha!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Haha,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So, er&hellip;see you tomorrow, then&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Fine.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes headed back to her room, deep in thought.</p>

<p class="para">Christine was there, looking critically at herself in the mirror. She spun around as Agnes entered; she even <span class="italic">moved</span> with exclamation marks.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, Perdita!! Have you heard?! I&rsquo;m to sing the part of Iodine tonight!! Isn&rsquo;t that <span class="italic">wonderful</span>?!&rdquo; She dashed across the room and endeavored to pick Agnes up and hug her, settling eventually for just hugging her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And I heard they&rsquo;re already letting you in the chorus!?&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page125"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t that nice?! I&rsquo;ve been practicing all morning with Mr. Salzella. Kesta!? Mallydetta!! Porter see bloker!!&rdquo; She twirled happily. Invisible sequins filled the air with their shine.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;When I am very famous,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;you won&rsquo;t regret having a friend in me!! I shall do my very best to help you!! I am sure you bring me luck!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed,&rdquo; said Agnes, hopelessly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Because my dear father told me that one day a dear little pixie would arrive to help me achieve my great ambition, and, do you know, I think that little pixie is <span class="italic">you</span>!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes smiled unhappily. After you&rsquo;d known Christine for any length of time, you found yourself fighting a desire to look into her ear to see if you could spot daylight coming the other way.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er. I thought we had swapped rooms?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, <span class="italic">that</span>!!&rdquo; said Christine, smiling. &ldquo;Wasn&rsquo;t I <span class="italic">silly</span>?! Anyway, I shall need the big mirror now that I am to be a prima donna! You don&rsquo;t mind, do you!?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What? Oh. No. No, of course not. Er. If you&rsquo;re sure&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes looked at the mirror, and then at the bed. And then at Christine.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No,&rdquo; she said, shocked at the enormity of the idea that had just presented itself, delivered from the Perdita of her soul. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure that will be fine.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Dr. Undershaft blew his nose and tried to tidy himself up.</p>

<p class="para">Well, he didn&rsquo;t have to stand for it. Perhaps the child was somewhat on the heavy side, but Gigli, <a id="page126"></a>for example, had once crushed a tenor to death and no one had thought any worse of her for it.</p>

<p class="para">He&rsquo;d protest to Mr. Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">Dr. Undershaft was a single-minded man. He believed in voices. It didn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">matter</span> what anyone looked like. He never watched opera with his eyes open. It was the music that mattered, not the acting and certainly not the shape of the singers.</p>

<p class="para">What did it matter what shape she was? Dame Tessitura had a beard you could strike a match on and a nose flattened half across her face, but she was still one of the best basses who ever opened beer bottles with her thumb.</p>

<p class="para">Of course Salzella said that, while everyone accepted that large women of fifty could play thin girls of seventeen, people wouldn&rsquo;t accept that a fat girl of seventeen could do it. He said they&rsquo;d cheerfully swallow a big lie and choke on a little fib. Salzella said that sort of thing.</p>

<p class="para">Something was going wrong these days. The whole place seemed&hellip;sick, if a building could be sick. The crowds were still coming, but the money just didn&rsquo;t seem to be there anymore; everything seemed to be so expensive&hellip;And now they were owned by a <span class="italic">cheese monger</span>, for heaven&rsquo;s sake, some grubby counter jumper who&rsquo;d probably want to bring in fancy ideas. What they needed was a businessman, some clerk who could add up columns of figures properly and not interfere. That was the trouble with all the owners he had experienced&mdash;they started off thinking of themselves as businessmen, and then suddenly began to think they could make an artistic contribution.</p>

<p class="para">Still, possibly cheese mongers had to add up <a id="page127"></a>cheeses. Just so long as this one stayed in his office with the books, and didn&rsquo;t go around acting as though he owned the place just because he happened to own the place&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Undershaft blinked. He&rsquo;d gone the wrong way again. No matter how long you&rsquo;d been here, this place was a maze. He was behind the stage, in the orchestra&rsquo;s room. Instruments and folding chairs had been stacked everywhere. His foot toppled a beer bottle.</p>

<p class="para">The twang of a string made him look around. Broken instruments littered the floor. There were half a dozen smashed violins. Several oboes had been broken. The trom had been pulled right out of a trombone.</p>

<p class="para">He looked up into someone&rsquo;s face.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But&hellip;why are <span class="italic">you&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The half-moon spectacles tumbled over and over, and smashed on the boards.</p>

<p class="para">Then the attacker lowered his mask, as smooth and white as the skull of an angel, and stepped forward purposefully&hellip;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Dr. Undershaft blinked.</p>

<p class="para">There was darkness. A cloaked figure raised its head and looked at him through bony white sockets.</p>

<p class="para">Dr. Undershaft&rsquo;s recent memories were a little confused, but one fact stood out.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Aha,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Got you! You&rsquo;re the Ghost!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Y<span class="smallCaps">OU KNOW, YOU&rsquo;RE RATHER AMUSINGLY WRONG</span>.</p>

<p class="para">Dr. Undershaft watched another masked figure pick up the body of&hellip;Dr. Undershaft, and drag it into the shadows.</p>
<a id="page128"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, I <span class="italic">see</span>. I&rsquo;m dead.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Death nodded.</p>

<p class="para">S<span class="smallCaps">UCH WOULD APPEAR TO BE THE CASE</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That was murder! Does anyone know?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">T<span class="smallCaps">HE MURDERER</span>. A<span class="smallCaps">ND YOU, OF COURSE</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But <span class="italic">him</span>? How can&mdash;?&rdquo; Undershaft began.</p>

<p class="para">W<span class="smallCaps">E MUST GO</span>, said Death.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But he just killed me! Strangled me with his bare hands!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Y<span class="smallCaps">ES</span>. C<span class="smallCaps">HALK IT UP TO EXPERIENCE</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You mean I can&rsquo;t do anything about it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">L<span class="smallCaps">EAVE IT TO THE LIVING</span>. G<span class="smallCaps">ENERALLY SPEAKING, THEY GET UNEASY WHEN THE DECEASED TAKES A CONSTRUCTIVE ROLE IN A MURDER INVESTIGATION</span>. T<span class="smallCaps">HEY TEND TO LOSE CONCENTRATION</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You know, you do have a very good bass voice.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">T<span class="smallCaps">HANK YOU</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Are there going to be&hellip;choirs and things?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">W<span class="smallCaps">OULD YOU LIKE SOME</span>?</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Agnes slipped out through the stage door and into the streets of Ankh-Morpork.</p>

<p class="para">She blinked in the light. The air felt slightly prickly, and sharp, and too cold.</p>

<p class="para">What she was about to do was wrong. Very wrong. And all her life she&rsquo;d done things that were right.</p>

<p class="para">Go on, said Perdita.</p>

<p class="para">In fact, she probably wouldn&rsquo;t even do it. But there was no harm in just asking where there was an herbal shop, so she asked.</p>

<p class="para">And there was no harm in going in, so she went in.</p>

<p class="para">And it certainly wasn&rsquo;t against any kind of law to <a id="page129"></a>buy the ingredients she bought. After all, she might get a headache later on, or be unable to sleep.</p>

<p class="para">And it would mean nothing at all to take them back to her room and tuck them under the mattress.</p>

<p class="para">That&rsquo;s right, said Perdita.</p>

<p class="para">In fact, if you averaged out the moral difficulty of what she was proposing over all the little activities she had to undergo in order to do it, it probably wasn&rsquo;t that bad at all, really&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">These comforting thoughts were arranging themselves in her mind as she headed back. She turned a corner and nearly walked into Nanny Ogg and Granny Weatherwax.</p>

<p class="para">She flung herself against the wall and stopped breathing.</p>

<p class="para">They hadn&rsquo;t seen her, although Nanny&rsquo;s foul cat leered at her over its owner&rsquo;s shoulder.</p>

<p class="para">They&rsquo;d take her back! She just knew they would!</p>

<p class="para">The fact that she was a free agent and her own mistress and quite at liberty to go off to Ankh-Morpork had nothing to do with it. They&rsquo;d <span class="italic">interfere</span>. They always did.</p>

<p class="para">She scurried back along the alley and ran as fast as she could to the rear of the Opera House.</p>

<p class="para">The stage-doorkeeper took no notice of her.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Granny and Nanny strolled through the city toward the area known as the Isle of Gods. It wasn&rsquo;t exactly Ankh and it wasn&rsquo;t exactly Morpork, being situated where the river bent so much it almost formed an island. It was where the city kept all those things it occasionally needed but was uneasy about, like the Watch-house, the theaters, the prison and the pub<a id="page130"></a>lishers. It was the place for all those things which might go off bang in unexpected ways.</p>

<p class="para">Greebo ambled along behind them. The air was full of new smells, and he was looking forward to seeing if any of them belonged to anything he could eat, fight or ravish.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg found herself getting increasingly worried. &ldquo;This isn&rsquo;t really <span class="italic">us</span>, Esme,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who is it, then?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean the book was just a bit of fun. No sense in making ourselves unpopular, is there?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can&rsquo;t have witches being done down, Gytha.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t feel done down. I felt fine until you <span class="italic">told</span> me I was done down,&rdquo; said Nanny, putting her finger on a major sociological point.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;ve been exploited,&rdquo; said Granny firmly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No I ain&rsquo;t.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes you have. You&rsquo;re a downtrodden mass.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No I ain&rsquo;t.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;ve been swindled out of your life savings,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Two dollars?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, it&rsquo;s all you&rsquo;d actually <span class="italic">saved</span>,&rdquo; said Granny, accurately.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Only &rsquo;cos I spent everything else,&rdquo; said Nanny. Other people salted away money for their old age, but Nanny preferred to accumulate memories.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, there you are, then.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I was putting that by for some new piping for my still up at Copperhead,&rdquo; said Nanny.<span class="footnoteRef"><a href="footnote.xhtml#ft5" id="ft_5">*</a></span> &ldquo;You <a id="page131"></a>know how that scumble eats away at the metal&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You were putting a little something by for some security and peace of mind in your old age,&rdquo; Granny translated.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t get peace of mind with my scumble,&rdquo; said Nanny happily. &ldquo;Pieces, yes, but not peace. It&rsquo;s made from the finest apples, you know,&rdquo; she added. &ldquo;Well, mainly apples.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny stopped outside an ornate doorway, and peered at the brass plate affixed thereon.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is the place,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">They looked at the door.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve never been one for front doors,&rdquo; said Nanny, shifting from one foot to the other.</p>

<p class="para">Granny nodded. Witches had a thing about front doors. A brief search located an alleyway which led around the back of the building. Here was a pair of much larger doors, wide open. Several dwarfs were loading bundles of books onto a cart. A rhythmic thumping came from somewhere beyond the doorway.</p>

<p class="para">No one took any notice of the witches as they wandered inside.</p>

<p class="para">Movable type was known in Ankh-Morpork, but if wizards heard about it they moved it where no one could find it. They generally didn&rsquo;t interfere with the running of the city, but when it came to movable type the pointy foot was put down hard. They had never explained why, and people didn&rsquo;t press the issue because you didn&rsquo;t press the issue with wizards, not if you liked yourself the shape <a id="page132"></a>you were. They simply worked around the problem, and engraved everything. This took a long time and meant that Ankh-Morpork was, for example, denied the benefit of newspapers, leaving the population to fool themselves as best they could.</p>

<p class="para">A press was thumping gently at one end of the warehouse. Beside it, at long tables, a number of dwarfs and humans were stitching pages together and gluing on the covers.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny took a book off a pile. It was <span class="italic">The Joye of Snacks</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can I help you, ladies?&rdquo; said a voice. Its tone suggested very clearly that it wasn&rsquo;t anticipating offering any kind of help whatsoever, except out into the street at speed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve come about this book,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m Mrs. Ogg,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">The man looked her up and down.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh yes? Can you identify yourself?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Certainly. I&rsquo;d know me anywhere.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hah! Well, I happen to know what Gytha Ogg looks like, madam, and she does not look like <span class="italic">you</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg opened her mouth to reply, and then said, in the voice of one who has stepped happily into the road and only now remembers about the onrushing coach: &ldquo;&hellip;Oh.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And how do you know what Mrs. Ogg looks like?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, is that the time? We&rsquo;d better be going&mdash;&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Because, as a matter of fact, she sent me a picture,&rdquo; said Goatberger, taking out his wallet.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure we&rsquo;re not at <span class="italic">all</span> interested,&rdquo; said Nanny hurriedly, pulling on Granny&rsquo;s arm.</p>
<a id="page133"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m <span class="italic">extremely</span> interested,&rdquo; said Granny. She snatched a folded piece of paper out of Goatberger&rsquo;s hands, and peered at it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hah! Yes&hellip;that&rsquo;s Gytha Ogg all right,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Yes, indeed. I remember when that young artist came to Lancre for the summer.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I wore my hair longer in those days,&rdquo; muttered Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Just as well, considering,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t know you had <span class="italic">copies</span>, though.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, you know how it is when you&rsquo;re young,&rdquo; said Nanny dreamily. &ldquo;It was doodle, doodle, doodle all summer long.&rdquo; She awoke from her reverie. &ldquo;And I still weigh the same now as I did then,&rdquo; she added.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Except that it&rsquo;s shifted,&rdquo; said Granny, nastily.</p>

<p class="para">She handed the sketch back to Goatberger. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s her all right,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But it&rsquo;s out by about sixty years and several layers of clothing. This is Gytha Ogg, right here.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re telling me <span class="italic">this</span> came up with Bananana Soup Surprise?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Did you try it?&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Cropper the head printer did, yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Was he surprised?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not half as surprised as Mrs. Cropper.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It can take people like that,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;I think perhaps I overdo the nutmeg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Goatberger stared at her. Doubt was beginning to assail him. You only had to look at Nanny Ogg grinning back at you to believe she <span class="italic">could</span> write something like <span class="italic">The Joye of Snacks</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Did you really write this?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;From memory,&rdquo; said Nanny, proudly.</p>
<a id="page134"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And now she&rsquo;d like some money,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Goatberger&rsquo;s face twisted up as though he&rsquo;d just eaten a lemon and washed it down with vinegar.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But we gave her the money <span class="italic">back</span>,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;See?&rdquo; said Nanny, her face falling. &ldquo;I told you, Esme&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She wants some more,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, I don&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, she doesn&rsquo;t!&rdquo; Goatberger agreed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She does,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;She wants a little bit of money for every book you&rsquo;ve sold.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t expect to be treated like royalty,&rdquo; said Nanny.<span class="footnoteRef"><a href="footnote.xhtml#ft6" id="ft_6">*</a></span></p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You shut up,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I know what you want. We want some money, Mr. Goatberger.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And what if I won&rsquo;t give it to you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny glared at him.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then we shall go away and think about what to do next,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s no idle threat,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a lot of people&rsquo;ve regretted Esme thinking about what to do next.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Come back when you&rsquo;ve thought, then!&rdquo; snapped Goatberger. He stormed off. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know, authors wanting to be paid, good grief&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He disappeared among the stacks of books.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;do you think that could have gone better?&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Granny glanced at the table beside them. It was stacked with long sheets of paper. She nudged a <a id="page135"></a>dwarf, who had been watching the argument with some amusement.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;re these?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They&rsquo;re proofs for the Almanack.&rdquo; He saw her blank expression. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re sort of a trial run for the book so&rsquo;s we can check that all the spelling mistakes have been left in.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny picked it up. &ldquo;Come, Gytha,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want trouble, Esme,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg as she hurried after her. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only money.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It ain&rsquo;t money any more,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a way of keepin&rsquo; score.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Mr. Bucket picked up a violin. It was in two pieces, held together by the strings. One of them broke.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who&rsquo;d do something like this?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Honestly, Salzella&hellip;what <span class="italic">is</span> the difference between opera and madness?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Is this a trick question?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then I&rsquo;d say: better scenery. Ah&hellip;I thought so&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella rooted among the destruction, and stood up with a letter in his hand.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Would you like me to open it?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s addressed to you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket shut his eyes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Go on,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t bother about the details. Just tell me, how many exclamation marks?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Five.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella passed the paper over.</p>

<p class="para">Bucket read:</p>
<a id="page136"></a>

<div class="extractLetter">

<p class="extractLetterSalutation"><span class="italic">Dear Bucket</span></p>

<p class="extractLetterTextCenter"><span class="italic">Whoops!</span></p>

<p class="extractLetterTextCenter"><span class="italic">Ahahahahahahahaha!!!!!</span></p>
<br/>
<p class="extractLetterSignature"><span class="italic">Yrs<br /> The Opera Ghost</span></p>
</div>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What can we do?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;One moment he writes polite little notes, the next he goes mad on paper!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Herr Trubelmacher has got everyone out hunting for new instruments,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Are violins more expensive than ballet shoes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There are few things in the world more expensive than ballet shoes. Violins happen to be among them,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Further expense!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It seems so, yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But I thought the Ghost <span class="italic">liked</span> music! Herr Trubelmacher tells me the organ is beyond repair!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He stopped. He was aware that he had exclaimed a little less rationally than a sane man should.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, well,&rdquo; Bucket continued wearily. &ldquo;The show must go on, I suppose.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">Bucket shook his head. &ldquo;How&rsquo;s it all going for tonight?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think it will work, if that&rsquo;s what you mean. Perdita seems to have a very good grasp of the part.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And Christine?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She has an astonishingly good grasp of wearing a dress. Between them, they make one prima donna.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The proud owner of the Opera House got slowly to his feet. &ldquo;It all seemed so simple,&rdquo; he moaned. &ldquo;I <a id="page137"></a>thought: opera, how hard can it be? Songs. Pretty girls dancing. Nice scenery. Lots of people handing over cash. Got to be better than the cut-throat world of yogurt, I thought. Now everywhere I go there&rsquo;s&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Something crunched under his shoe. He picked up the remains of a pair of half-moon spectacles.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;These are Dr. Undershaft&rsquo;s, aren&rsquo;t they?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;What&rsquo;re they doing here?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">His eyes met Salzella&rsquo;s steady gaze.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, <span class="italic">no</span>,&rdquo; he groaned.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella turned slightly, and stared hard at a big double-bass case leaning against the wall. He raised his eyebrows.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, <span class="italic">no</span>,&rdquo; said Bucket, again. &ldquo;Go on. Open it. My hands have gone all sweaty&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella padded across to the case and grasped the lid. &ldquo;Ready?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket nodded, wearily.</p>

<p class="para">The case was flung open.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, no!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella craned round to see.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah, yes,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;A broken neck, and the body has been kicked in considerably. That&rsquo;ll cost a dollar or two to repair, and no mistake.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And all the strings are busted! Are double basses more expensive to rebuild than violins?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I am afraid that all musical instruments are incredibly expensive to repair, with the possible exception of the triangle,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;However, it could have been worse, hmm?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, it <span class="italic">could</span> have been Dr. Undershaft in there, yes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket gaped at him, and then shut his mouth. <a id="page138"></a>&ldquo;Oh, Yes. Of course. Oh, yes. That would have been worse. Yes. Bit of luck there, I suppose. Yes. Um.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;So that&rsquo;s an opera house, is it?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Looks like someone built a great big box and glued the architecture on afterward.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She coughed, and appeared to be waiting for something.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can we have a look around?&rdquo; said Nanny dutifully, aware that Granny&rsquo;s curiosity was equaled only by her desire not to show it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It can&rsquo;t do any harm, I suppose,&rdquo; said Granny, as if granting a big favor. &ldquo;Seein&rsquo; as we&rsquo;ve nothing else to do right this minute.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The Opera House was, indeed, that most efficiently multifunctional of building designs. It was a cube. But, as Granny had pointed out, the architect had suddenly realized late in the day that there ought to be <span class="italic">some</span> sort of decoration, and had shoved it on hurriedly, in a riot of friezes, pillars, corybants, and curly bits. Gargoyles had colonized the higher reaches. The effect, seen from the front, was of a huge wall of tortured stone.</p>

<p class="para">Round the back, of course, there was the usual drab mess of windows, pipes and damp stone walls. One of the rules of a certain type of public architecture is that it only happens at the front.</p>

<p class="para">Granny paused under a window. &ldquo;Someone&rsquo;s singing,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Listen.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;La-la-la-la-la-LAH,&rdquo; trilled someone. &ldquo;Do-Re-Mi-Fah-So-La-Ti-Do&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s opera, right enough,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Sounds foreign to me.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page139"></a>

<p class="para">Nanny had an unexpected gift for languages; she could be comprehensibly incompetent in a new one within an hour or two. What she spoke was one step away from gibberish but it was authentically <span class="italic">foreign</span> gibberish. And she knew that Granny Weatherwax, whatever her other qualities, had an even bigger tin ear for languages than she did for music.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er. Could be,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s always a lot going on, I know that. Our Nev said they sometimes do different operations every night.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How did he find that out?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, there was a lot of lead. That takes some shifting. He said he liked the noisy ones. He could hum along and also no one heard the hammering.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The witches strolled onward.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Did you notice young Agnes nearly bump into us back there?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. It was all I could do not to turn around,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She wasn&rsquo;t very pleased to see us, was she? I practically heard her gasp.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s very suspicious, if you ask me,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;I mean, she sees two friendly faces from back home, you&rsquo;d expect her to come runnin&rsquo; up&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;re old friends, after all. Old friends of her grandma and her mum, anyway, and that&rsquo;s practic&rsquo;ly the same.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Remember those eyes in the teacup?&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;She could be under the gaze of some strange occult force! We got to be careful. People can be very tricky when they&rsquo;re in the grip of a strange occult force. Remember Mr. Scruple over in Slice?&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page140"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That wasn&rsquo;t a strange occult force. That was acid stomach.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, it certainly seemed strangely occult for a while. Especially if the windows were shut.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Their perambulation had taken them to the Opera House&rsquo;s stage door.</p>

<p class="para">Granny looked up at a line of posters.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;La Triviata,&rdquo; she read aloud. &ldquo;<span class="italic">The Ring of the Nibelungingung&hellip;</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, basically there are two sorts of opera,&rdquo; said Nanny, who also had the true witch&rsquo;s ability to be confidently expert on the basis of no experience whatsoever. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s your heavy opera, where basically people sing foreign and it goes like &lsquo;Oh, oh, oh, I am dyin&rsquo;, oh, I am dyin&rsquo;, oh, oh, oh, that&rsquo;s what I&rsquo;m doin&rsquo;,&rdquo; and there&rsquo;s your light opera, where they sing in foreign and it basically goes &lsquo;Beer! Beer! Beer! Beer! I like to drink lots of beer!&rsquo;, although sometimes they drink champagne instead. That&rsquo;s basically all of opera, reely.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What? Either dyin&rsquo; or drinkin&rsquo; beer?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Basically, yes,&rdquo; said Nanny, contriving to suggest that this was the whole gamut of human experience.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And that&rsquo;s opera?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We-ll&hellip;there might be <span class="italic">some</span> other stuff. But mostly it&rsquo;s stout or stabbin&rsquo;.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny was aware of a presence.</p>

<p class="para">She turned.</p>

<p class="para">A figure had emerged from the stage door, carrying a poster, a bucket of glue and a brush.</p>

<p class="para">It was a strange figure, a sort of neat scarecrow in clothes slightly too small for it, although, to be truthful, there were probably no clothes that would  <a id="page141"></a>have fit that body. The ankles and wrists seemed infinitely extensible and independently guided.</p>

<p class="para">It encountered the two witches standing at the poster board, and stopped politely. They could <span class="italic">see</span> the sentence marshaling itself behind the unfocused eyes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Excuse me ladies! The show must go on!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The words were all there and they made sense, but each sentence was fired out into the world as a unit.</p>

<p class="para">Granny pulled Nanny to one side.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Thank you!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">They watched in silence as the man, with great and meticulous care, applied paste to a neat rectangle and then affixed the poster, smoothing every crease methodically.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;s your name, young man?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s a nice beret you have there.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;My mum bought it for me!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter chased the last air bubble to the edge of the paper and stood back. Then, completely ignoring the witches in his preoccupation with his task, he picked up the paste pot and went back inside.</p>

<p class="para">The witches stared at the new poster in silence.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Y&rsquo;know, I wouldn&rsquo;t mind seein&rsquo; an operation,&rdquo; said Nanny, after a while. &ldquo;Senior Basilica did give us the tickets.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, you know me,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Can&rsquo;t be having with that sort of thing at all.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny looked sideways at her, and grinned to herself. This was a familiar Weatherwax opening line. It meant: Of course I want to, but you&rsquo;ve got to persuade me.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re right, o&rsquo; course,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s for them <a id="page142"></a>folks in all their fine carriages. It&rsquo;s not for the likes of us.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny looked hesitant for a moment.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I expect it&rsquo;s having ideas above our station,&rdquo; Nanny went on. &ldquo;I expect if we went in they&rsquo;d say: Be off, you nasty ole crones&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, they would, would they?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t expect they want common folk like what we are comin&rsquo; in with all those smart nobby people,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Is that a fact? Is that a fact, madam? You just come with me!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny stalked round to the front of the building, where people were already alighting from coaches. She pushed her way up the steps and shouldered through the crowd to the ticket office.</p>

<p class="para">She leaned forward. The man behind the grille leaned back.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Nasty old crones, eh?&rdquo; she snapped.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I beg your pardon&mdash;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not before time! See here, we&rsquo;ve got tickets for&mdash;&rdquo; She looked down at the pieces of cardboard, and pulled Nanny Ogg over. &ldquo;It says here <span class="italic">Stalls</span>. The cheek of it! Stalls? Us?&rdquo; She turned back to the ticket man. &ldquo;See here, Stalls aren&rsquo;t good enough, we want seats in&rdquo;&mdash;she looked up at the board by the ticket window&mdash;&ldquo;the Gods. Yes, that sounds about right.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry? You&rsquo;ve got tickets for Stalls seats and you want to exchange them for seats in the Gods?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, and don&rsquo;t you go expecting us to pay any more money!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I wasn&rsquo;t going to ask you for&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Just as well!&rdquo; said Granny, smiling triumphantly. <a id="page143"></a>She looked approvingly at the new tickets. &ldquo;Come, Gytha.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er, excuse me,&rdquo; said the man as Nanny Ogg turned away, &ldquo;but what is that on your shoulders?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s&hellip;a fur collar,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Excuse <span class="italic">me</span>, but I just saw it flick its tail.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. I happen to believe in beauty without cruelty.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Agnes was aware of something happening backstage. Little groups of men were forming, and then breaking up as various individuals hurried away about their mysterious tasks.</p>

<p class="para">Out in front the orchestra was already tuning up. The chorus was filing on to be A Busy Marketplace, in which various jugglers, gypsies, sword swallowers and gaily dressed yokels would be entirely unsurprised at an apparently drunken baritone strolling on to sing an enormous amount of plot at a passing tenor.</p>

<p class="para">She saw Mr. Bucket and Mr. Salzella deep in argument with the stage manager.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How can we search the entire building? This place is a maze!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He might have just wandered off somewhere&hellip;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s as blind as a bat without those glasses.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But we can&rsquo;t be <span class="italic">certain</span> something&rsquo;s happened to him.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes? You didn&rsquo;t say that when we opened the double-bass case. You were certain he was going to be inside. Admit it.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page144"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&hellip;wasn&rsquo;t expecting just to find a smashed double bass, yes. But I was feeling a bit mithered at that point.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A sword swallower nudged Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Curtain up in one minute, dear,&rdquo; he said, smearing mustard on his sword.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Has something happened to Dr. Undershaft?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Couldn&rsquo;t say, dear. You wouldn&rsquo;t have any salt, would you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;&rsquo;Scuse me. &rsquo;Scuse me. Sorry. &rsquo;Scuse me. Was that your foot? &rsquo;Scuse me&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Leaving a trail of annoyed and pained patrons in their wake, the witches trod their way to their seats.</p>

<p class="para">Granny elbowed herself comfortable and then, having in some matters the boredom threshold of a four-year-old, said: &ldquo;What&rsquo;s happenin&rsquo; now?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny&rsquo;s skimpy knowledge of opera didn&rsquo;t come to her aid. So she turned to the lady beside her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Scuse me, could I borrow your program? Thank you. &rsquo;Scuse me, could I borrow your spectacles? So kind.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She spent a few moments in careful study.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is the overture,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s kind of a free sample of what&rsquo;s going to happen. &rsquo;S got a summary of the story, too. <span class="italic">La Triviata</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Her lips moved as she read. Occasionally her brow wrinkled.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, it&rsquo;s quite simple reely,&rdquo; she said, at last. &ldquo;A lot of people are in love with one another, there&rsquo;s considerable dressing up as other people and general <a id="page145"></a>confusion, there&rsquo;s a cheeky servant, no one really knows who anyone is, a couple of ole dukes go mad, chorus of gypsies, etc. Your basic opera. Someone&rsquo;s prob&rsquo;ly going to turn out to be someone else&rsquo;s long-lost son or daughter or wife or something.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shh!&rdquo; said a voice behind them.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Wish we&rsquo;d brought something to eat,&rdquo; muttered Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think I&rsquo;ve got some peppermints in my knicker leg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shh!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I would like my spectacles back, please.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Here you are, ma&rsquo;am. They&rsquo;re not very good, are they?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Someone tapped Nanny Ogg on the shoulder. &ldquo;Madam, your fur stole is eating my chocolates!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">And someone tapped Granny Weatherwax on <span class="italic">her</span> shoulder. &ldquo;Madam, kindly remove your hat.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg choked on her peppermint.</p>

<p class="para">Granny Weatherwax turned to the red-faced gentleman behind her. &ldquo;You do know what a woman in a pointy hat is, don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Yes</span>, madam. A woman in a pointy hat is sitting in front of me.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny gave him a stare. And then, to Nanny&rsquo;s surprise, she removed her hat.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I do beg your pardon,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I can see I was inadvertently bad-mannered. Pray excuse me.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She turned back to the stage.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg started breathing again. &ldquo;You feeling all right, Esme?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Never better.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny Weatherwax surveyed the auditorium, oblivious to the sounds around her.</p>
<a id="page146"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">I assure you, madam, your fur</span> is <span class="italic">eating my chocolates. It&rsquo;s started on the second layer!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Oh, dear. Show him the little map inside the lid, will you? He&rsquo;s only after the truffles, and you can soon rub the dribble off the others</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Do you mind being quiet?</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">I don&rsquo;t mind, it&rsquo;s this man and his chocolates that&rsquo;s making the noise&mdash;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A big room, Granny thought. A great big room without windows&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">There was a tingling in her thumbs.</p>

<p class="para">She looked at the chandelier. The rope disappeared into an alcove in the ceiling.</p>

<p class="para">Her gaze passed along the rows of Boxes. They were all quite crowded. On one, though, the curtains were almost closed, as if someone inside wanted to see out without being seen.</p>

<p class="para">Then Granny looked among the Stalls. The audience was mainly human. Here and there was the hulking shape of a troll, although the troll equivalent of operas usually went on for a couple of years. A few dwarf helmets gleamed, although dwarfs normally weren&rsquo;t interested in anything without dwarfs in. There seemed to be a lot of feathers down there, and here and there the glint of jewelry. Shoulders were being worn bare this season. A lot of attention had been paid to appearances. The people were here to look, not to see.</p>

<p class="para">She closed her eyes.</p>

<p class="para">This was when you started being a witch. It wasn&rsquo;t when you did headology on daft old men, or mixed up medicines, or stuck up for yourself, or knew one herb from another.</p>

<p class="para">It was when you opened your mind to the world <a id="page147"></a>and carefully examined everything it picked up.</p>

<p class="para">She ignored her ears until the sounds of the audience became just a distant buzz.</p>

<p class="para">Or, at least, a distant buzz broken by the voice of Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Says here that Dame Timpani, who sings the part of Quizella, is a diva,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;So I reckon this is like a part-time job, then. Prob&rsquo;ly quite a good idea, on account of you have to be able to hold your breath. Good trainin&rsquo; for the singin&rsquo;.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny nodded without opening her eyes.</p>

<p class="para">She kept them closed as the opera started. Nanny, who knew when to leave her friend to her own devices, tried to keep quiet but felt impelled to give out a running commentary.</p>

<p class="para">Then she said, &ldquo;There&rsquo;s Agnes! Hey, that&rsquo;s Agnes!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Stop wavin&rsquo; and sit down,&rdquo; murmured Granny, trying to hold on to her waking dream.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny leaned over the balcony.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&rsquo;s dressed up as a gypsy,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And now there&rsquo;s a girl come forward to sing&rdquo;&mdash;she peered at the stolen program&mdash;&ldquo;the famous &lsquo;Departure&rsquo; aria, it says here. Now that&rsquo;s what I call a good voice&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s Agnes singin&rsquo;,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, it&rsquo;s this girl Christine.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shut your eyes, you daft old woman, and tell me if that isn&rsquo;t Agnes singin&rsquo;,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg obediently shut her eyes for a moment, and then opened them again. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s Agnes singing!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But there&rsquo;s that girl with the big smile right out there in front moving her lips and everything!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page148"></a>

<p class="para">Nanny scratched her head. &ldquo;Something a bit wrong here, Esme. Can&rsquo;t have people stealing our Agnes&rsquo;s voice.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny&rsquo;s eyes were still shut. &ldquo;Tell me if the curtains on that Box down there on the right have moved,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I just saw them twitch, Esme.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny let herself relax again. She sank into the seat as the aria washed over her, and opened her mind once more&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Edges, walls, doors&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Once a space was enclosed it became a universe of its own. Some things remained trapped in it.</p>

<p class="para">The music passed through one side of her head and out the other, but with it came other things, strands of things, echoes of old screams&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">She drifted down further, down below the conscious, into the darkness beyond the circle of firelight.</p>

<p class="para">There was fear here. It stalked the place like a great dark animal. It lurked in every corner. It was in the stones. Old terror crouched in the shadows. It was one of the most ancient terrors, the one that meant that no sooner had mankind learned to walk on two legs than it dropped to its knees. It was the terror of impermanence, the knowledge that all this would pass away, that a beautiful voice or a wonderful figure was something whose arrival you couldn&rsquo;t control and whose departure you couldn&rsquo;t delay. It wasn&rsquo;t what she had been looking for, but it was perhaps the sea in which it swam.</p>

<p class="para">She went deeper.</p>

<p class="para">And there it was, roaring through the nighttime <a id="page149"></a>of the soul of the place like a deep cold current.</p>

<p class="para">As she drew closer she saw that it was not one thing but two, twisted around one another. She reached out&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Trickery. Lies. Deceit. Murder.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She blinked.</p>

<p class="para">Everyone had turned to look at her.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny tugged at her dress. &ldquo;Sit down, Esme!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny stared. The chandelier hung peacefully over the crowded seats.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They beat him to death!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;s that, Esme?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And they throw him into the river!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Esme!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Sh!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Madam, will you sit down at once!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;<span class="italic">and now it&rsquo;s started on the Nougat Whirls!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny snatched at her hat and did a crabwise run along the row, crushing some of the finest footwear in Ankh-Morpork under her thick Lancre soles.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny hung back reluctantly. She&rsquo;d quite enjoyed the song, and she wanted to applaud. But her pair of hands wasn&rsquo;t necessary. The audience had exploded as soon as the last note had died away.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg looked at the stage, and took note of something, and smiled. &ldquo;Like that, eh?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Gytha!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She sighed. &ldquo;Coming, Esme. &rsquo;Scuse me. &rsquo;Scuse me. Sorry. &rsquo;Scuse me&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny Weatherwax was out in the red plush corridor, leaning with her forehead against the wall.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is a bad one, Gytha,&rdquo; she muttered. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s all <a id="page150"></a>twisted up. I ain&rsquo;t at all sure I can make it happen right. The poor soul&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She straightened up. &ldquo;Look at me, Gytha, will you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Gytha obediently opened her eyes wide. She winced a little as a fragment of Granny Weatherwax&rsquo;s consciousness crept behind her eyes.</p>

<p class="para">Granny put her hat on, tucking in the occasional errant wisp of gray hair and then taking, one by one, the eight hat pins and ramming them home with the same frowning deliberation with which a mercenary might check his weapons.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right,&rdquo; she said at last.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg relaxed. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not that I mind, Esme,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;but I wish you&rsquo;d use a mirror.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Waste of money,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">Now fully armored, she strode off along the corridor.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Glad to see you didn&rsquo;t lose your temper with the man who went on about your hat,&rdquo; said Nanny, running along behind.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No point. He&rsquo;s going to be dead tomorrow.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, dear. What of?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Run over by a cart, I think.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why didn&rsquo;t you tell him?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I could be wrong.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny reached the stairs and thundered down them.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;re we going?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I want to see who&rsquo;s behind those curtains.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The applause, distant but still thunderous, filled the stairwell.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They certainly like Agnes&rsquo;s voice,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. I hopes we&rsquo;re in time.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page151"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, bugger!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I left Greebo up there!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, he likes meeting new people. Good grief, this place is a <span class="italic">maze</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny stepped out into a curved corridor, rather plusher than the one they had left. There was a series of doors along it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah. Now, then&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She walked along the row, counting, and then tried a handle.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can I help you, ladies?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">They turned. A little old woman had come up softly behind them, carrying a tray of drinks.</p>

<p class="para">Granny smiled at her. Nanny Ogg smiled at the tray.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We were just wondering,&rdquo; said Granny, &ldquo;which person in these Boxes likes to sit with the curtains nearly shut?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The tray began to shake.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Here, shall I hold that for you?&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll spill something if you&rsquo;re not careful.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do you know about Box Eight?&rdquo; said the old lady.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah. Box Eight,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;That&rsquo;d be the one, yes. That&rsquo;s this one over here, isn&rsquo;t it&hellip;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, please&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny strode forward and grasped the handle.</p>

<p class="para">The door was locked.</p>

<p class="para">The tray was thrust into Nanny&rsquo;s welcoming hands. &ldquo;Well, thank you, I don&rsquo;t mind if I do&hellip;&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">The woman pulled at Granny&rsquo;s arm. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t! It&rsquo;ll bring terrible bad luck!&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page152"></a>

<p class="para">Granny thrust out her hand. &ldquo;The key, madam!&rdquo; Behind her, Nanny inspected a glass of champagne.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t make him angry! It&rsquo;s bad enough as it is!&rdquo; The woman was clearly terrified.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Iron,&rdquo; said Granny, rattling the handle. &ldquo;Can&rsquo;t magic iron&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Here,&rdquo; said Nanny, stepping forward a little unsteadily. &ldquo;Give me one of your hat pins. Our Nev&rsquo;s taught me all kindsa tricks&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny&rsquo;s hand rose to her hat, and then she looked at Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s lined face. She lowered her hand.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;No, I reckon we&rsquo;ll leave it for now&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what&rsquo;s happening&hellip;&rdquo; sobbed Mrs. Plinge. &ldquo;It never used to be like this&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Have a good blow,&rdquo; said Nanny, handing her a grubby handkerchief and patting her kindly on the back.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;there was none of this killing people&hellip;he just wanted somewhere to watch the opera&hellip;it made him feel better&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who&rsquo;s this we&rsquo;re talking about?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg gave her a warning look over the top of the old woman&rsquo;s head. There were some things best left to Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;he&rsquo;d unlock it for an hour every Friday for me to tidy up and there was always his little note saying thank you or apologizing for the chocolates down the seat&hellip;and where was the harm in it, that&rsquo;s what I&rsquo;d like to know&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Have another good blow,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;and now there&rsquo;s people dropping like flies <a id="page153"></a>out of the flies&hellip;they say it&rsquo;s him, but I know he never meant any harm&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Course not,&rdquo; said Nanny, soothingly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;many&rsquo;s the time I&rsquo;ve seen &rsquo;em look up at the Box. They always felt the better for it if they saw him&hellip;and then poor Mr. Pounder was strangulated. I looked around and there was his hat, just like that&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s terrible when that happens,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s your name, dear?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mrs. Plinge,&rdquo; sniffed Mrs. Plinge. &ldquo;It came right down in front of me. I&rsquo;d have recognized it anywhere&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think it would be a good idea if we took you home, Mrs. Plinge,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, dear! I&rsquo;ve got all these ladies and gentlemen to see to! And anyway it&rsquo;s dangerous going home this time of night&hellip;Walter walks me home but he&rsquo;s got to stay late tonight&hellip;oh dear&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Have another good blow,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Find a bit that isn&rsquo;t too soggy.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a series of sharp pops. Granny Weatherwax had interlocked her fingers and extended her hands at arm&rsquo;s length, so that her knuckles cracked.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Dangerous, eh?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Well, we can&rsquo;t see you all upset like this. I&rsquo;ll walk you home and Mrs. Ogg will see to things here.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;only I&rsquo;ve got to attend to the Boxes&hellip;I&rsquo;ve got all these drinks to serve&hellip;could&rsquo;ve sworn I had them a moment ago&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mrs. Ogg knows all about drinks,&rdquo; said Granny, glaring at her friend.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There&rsquo;s nothing I don&rsquo;t know about drinks,&rdquo; <a id="page154"></a>agreed Nanny, shamelessly emptying the last glass. &ldquo;Especially these.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;and what about our Walter? He&rsquo;ll worry himself silly&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter&rsquo;s your son?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Wears a beret?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The old woman nodded.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Only I always comes back for him if he&rsquo;s working late&hellip;&rdquo; she began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You come back for him&hellip;but <span class="italic">he</span> sees you home?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s&hellip;he&rsquo;s&hellip;he&rsquo;s&hellip;&rdquo; Mrs. Plinge rallied. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s a good boy,&rdquo; she said defiantly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure he is, Mrs. Plinge,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">She carefully lifted the little white bonnet off Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s head and handed it to Nanny, who put it on, and also took the little white apron. That was the good thing about black. You could be nearly anything, wearing black. Mother Superior or Madam, it was really just a matter of the style. It just depended on the details.</p>

<p class="para">There was a click. Box Eight had bolted itself. And then there was the very faint scrape of a chair being wedged under the door handle.</p>

<p class="para">Granny smiled, and took Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s arm. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be back as soon as I can,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny nodded, and watched them go.</p>

<p class="para">There was a little cupboard at the end of the corridor. It contained a stool, Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s knitting, and a small but very well stocked bar. There were also, on a polished mahogany plank, a number of bells on big coiled springs.</p>

<p class="para">Several of them were bouncing up and down angrily.</p>
<a id="page155"></a>

<p class="para">Nanny poured herself a gin and gin with a dash of gin and inspected the rows of bottles with considerable interest.</p>

<p class="para">Another bell started to ring.</p>

<p class="para">There was a huge jar of stuffed olives. Nanny helped herself to a handful and blew the dust off a bottle of port.</p>

<p class="para">A bell fell off its spring.</p>

<p class="para">Somewhere out in the corridor a door opened and a young man&rsquo;s voice bellowed, &ldquo;Where are those drinks, woman!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny tried the port.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg was used to the idea of domestic service. As a girl, she&rsquo;d been a maid at Lancre Castle, where the king was inclined to press his intentions and anything else he could get hold of. Young Gytha Ogg had already lost her innocence<span class="footnoteRef"><a href="footnote.xhtml#ft7" id="ft_7">*</a></span> but she had some clear ideas about unwelcome intentions, and when he jumped out at her in the scullery she had technically committed treason with a large leg of lamb swung in both hands. That had ended her life below stairs and put a lengthy crimp in the king&rsquo;s activities above them.</p>

<p class="para">The brief experience had given her certain views which weren&rsquo;t anything so definite as political but were very firmly Oggish. And Mrs. Plinge had looked as if she didn&rsquo;t get very much to eat and not a lot of time to sleep, either. Her hands had been thin and red. Nanny had a lot of time for the Plinges of the world.</p>

<p class="para">Did port go with sherry? Oh, well, no harm in trying&hellip;</p>
<a id="page156"></a>

<p class="para">All the bells were ringing now. It must be coming up to the interval.</p>

<p class="para">She methodically unscrewed the top off a jar of cocktail onions, and thoughtfully crunched a couple.</p>

<p class="para">Then, as other people started to poke their heads around the doors and make angry demands, she went to the champagne shelf and took down a couple of magnums. She gave them a damn good shake, tucked one under each arm with a thumb on the corks, and stepped out into the corridor.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny&rsquo;s philosophy of life was to do what seemed like a good idea at the time, and do it as hard as possible. It had never let her down.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The curtains closed. The audience was still on its feet, applauding.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What happens now?&rdquo; whispered Agnes to the next gypsy.</p>

<p class="para">He pulled off his bandanna. &ldquo;Well, dear, we generally nip out to&mdash;Oh, no, they&rsquo;re going for a curtain call!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The curtains opened again. The light caught Christine, who curtsied and waved and sparkled.</p>

<p class="para">Her fellow gypsy nudged Agnes. &ldquo;Look at Dame Timpani,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a nose in a sling if ever I saw one.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes stared at the prima donna.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&rsquo;s smiling,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So does a tiger, dear.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The curtains shut once more, with a finality that said the stage manager was going to strike the set and would scream at someone if they dared to touch those ropes again&hellip;</p>
<a id="page157"></a>

<p class="para">Agnes ran off with the others. There wasn&rsquo;t too much to do in the next act. She&rsquo;d tried to memorize the plot earlier&mdash;although other members of the chorus had done their best to dissuade her, on the basis that you could either sing them or understand them, but not both.</p>

<p class="para">Nevertheless, Agnes was conscientious.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;so Peccadillo (ten.), the son of Duke Tagliatella (bass), has secretly disguised himself as a swineherd to woo Quizella, not knowing that Doctor Bufola (bar.) has sold the elixir to Ludi the servant, without realizing he is really the maid Iodine (sop.) dressed up as a boy because Count Artaud (bar.) claims that&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A deputy stage manager pulled her out of the way and waved at someone in the wings.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Lose the countryside, Ron.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a series of whistles from offstage, answered by another from above.</p>

<p class="para">The backcloth rose. From the gloom above, the sandbag counterweights began to descend.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;then Artaud reveals, er, that Zibeline must marry Fideli, I mean Fiabe, not knowing, er, that the family fortunes&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The sandbags came down. On one side of the stage, at least. On the other side, Agnes was interrupted in her impossible task by the screaming, and looked around into the upside-down and not at all well features of the late Dr. Undershaft.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Nanny skipped through a handy door, shut it behind her, and leaned on it. After a few moments the sound of running feet clattered past.</p>
<a id="page158"></a>

<p class="para">Well, that had been fun.</p>

<p class="para">She removed the lace bonnet and apron and, because there was a basic honesty in Nanny, she tucked them in a pocket to give back to Mrs. Plinge later. Then she pulled out a flat, round black shape and banged it against her arm. The point shot out. After a few adjustments her official hat was almost as good as new.</p>

<p class="para">She looked around. A certain absence of light and carpeting, together with a very presence of dust, suggested that this was a part of the place the public weren&rsquo;t supposed to see.</p>

<p class="para">Oh, damn. She supposed she had better find another door. Of course, that&rsquo;d mean she&rsquo;d have to leave Greebo, wherever he was, but he&rsquo;d turn up. He always did when he wanted feeding.</p>

<p class="para">There was a flight of steps leading down. She followed them to a corridor which was slightly better lit and ambled along it for quite a way. And then all she had to do was follow the screams.</p>

<p class="para">She emerged among the flats and jumbled props backstage.</p>

<p class="para">No one bothered about her. The appearance of a small, amiable old lady was not about to cause comment at this point.</p>

<p class="para">People were running backward and forward, shouting. More impressionable people were just standing in one place and screaming. A large lady was sprawled over two chairs having hysterics, while some distracted stagehands tried to fan her with a script.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg was not certain whether something important had happened or whether this was just a continuation of opera by other means.</p>
<a id="page159"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I should loosen her corsets, if I was you,&rdquo; she said as she ambled past.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good heavens, madam, there&rsquo;s enough panic in here as it is!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny moved on to an interesting crowd of gypsies, noblemen and stagehands.</p>

<p class="para">Witches are curious by definition and inquisitive by nature. She moved in.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Let me through. I&rsquo;m a nosy person,&rdquo; she said, employing both elbows. It worked, as this sort of approach generally does.</p>

<p class="para">There was a dead person lying on the floor. Nanny had seen death in a wide variety of guises, and certainly knew strangulation when it presented itself. It wasn&rsquo;t the nicest end, although it could be quite colorful.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh dear,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Poor man. What happened to him?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Bucket says he must have got caught up in the&mdash;&rdquo; someone began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He didn&rsquo;t get caught in anything! This is the Ghost&rsquo;s work!&rdquo; said someone else. &ldquo;He could still be up there!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">All eyes turned upward.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Salzella&rsquo;s sent some stagehands to flush him out.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Have they got flaming torches?&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Several of them looked at her as if wondering, for the first time, who she was.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Got to have flaming torches when you&rsquo;re tracking down evil monsters,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Well-known fact.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a moment while this sunk in, and then:</p>
<a id="page160"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s true.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&rsquo;s right, you know.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well-known fact, dear.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Did they have flaming torches?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t think so. Just ordinary lanterns.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, they&rsquo;re no good,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s for smugglers, lanterns. For evil monsters you need flaming&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Excuse me, boys and girls!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The stage manager had stood on a box.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Now,&rdquo; he said, a little pale around the face, &ldquo;I know you&rsquo;re all familiar with the phrase &lsquo;the show must go on&rsquo;&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a chorus of groans from the chorus.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s very hard to sing a jolly song about eating hedgehogs when you&rsquo;re waiting for an <span class="italic">accident</span> to happen to you,&rdquo; shouted a gypsy king.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Funny thing, if we&rsquo;re talking about songs about hedgehogs, I myself&mdash;&rdquo; Nanny began, but no one was paying her any attention.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Now, we don&rsquo;t actually know what happened&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really? Shall we guess?&rdquo; said a gypsy.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;but we have men up in the fly loft now&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh? In case of more <span class="italic">accidents</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;and Mr. Bucket has authorized me to say that there will be an additional two dollars&rsquo; bonus tonight in recognition of your bravely agreeing to <span class="italic">continue with the show</span>&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Money? After a shock like this? Money? He thinks he can offer us a couple of dollars and we&rsquo;ll agree to stay on this cursed stage?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shame!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Heartless!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Unthinkable!&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page161"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Should be at least four!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Right! Right!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;For shame, my friends! To talk about a few dollars when there is a dead man lying there&hellip;Have you no respect for his memory?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Exactly! A few dollars <span class="italic">is</span> disrespectful. Five dollars or nothing!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg nodded to herself, and wandered off and found a sufficiently big piece of cloth to cover the late Dr. Undershaft.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny rather liked the theatrical world. It was its own kind of magic. That was why Esme disliked it, she reckoned. It was the magic of illusions and misdirection and foolery, and that was fine by Nanny Ogg, because you couldn&rsquo;t be married three times without a little fooling. But it was just close enough to Granny&rsquo;s own kind of magic to make Granny uneasy. Which meant she couldn&rsquo;t leave it alone. It was like scratching an itch.</p>

<p class="para">People didn&rsquo;t take any notice of little old ladies who looked as though they fitted in, and Nanny Ogg could fit in faster than a dead chicken in a maggot factory.</p>

<p class="para">Besides, Nanny had one additional little talent, which was a mind like a buzz saw behind a face like an elderly apple.</p>

<p class="para">Someone was crying.</p>

<p class="para">A strange figure was kneeling beside the late chorus master. It looked like a puppet with the strings cut.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can you give me a hand with this sheet, mister?&rdquo; said Nanny quietly.</p>

<p class="para">The face looked up. Two watery eyes, running <a id="page162"></a>with tears, blinked at Nanny. &ldquo;He won&rsquo;t wake up!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny mentally changed gear. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s right, luv,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re Walter, ain&rsquo;t you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He was always very good to me and our mum! He never gave me a kick!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">It was obvious to Nanny that there was no help here. She knelt down and began to do her best with the departed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Miss they say it were the Ghost miss! It weren&rsquo;t the Ghost miss! He&rsquo;d never do a thing like that! He was always good to me and our mum!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny changed gear again. You had to slow down a bit for Walter Plinge.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;My mum&rsquo;d know what to do!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, well&hellip;she&rsquo;s gone home early, Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter&rsquo;s waxy face started to contort into an expression of terminal horror.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She mustn&rsquo;t walk home without Walter to look after her!&rdquo; he shouted.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I bet she always says that,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;I bet she always makes sure her Walter&rsquo;s with her when she goes home. But I expect that right now she&rsquo;d want her Walter to just get on with things so&rsquo;s she can be proud of him. Show&rsquo;s not half over yet.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;S dangerous for our mum!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny patted his hand and absentmindedly wiped her own hand on her dress.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s a good boy,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Now, I&rsquo;ve got to go off&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The Ghost wouldn&rsquo;t harm no one!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, Walter, only I&rsquo;ve got to go but I&rsquo;ll find someone to help you and you must put poor Dr. Undershaft somewhere safe until after the show. <a id="page163"></a>Understand? And I&rsquo;m Mrs. Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter gawped at her, and then nodded sharply.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good boy.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny left him still looking at the body and headed farther backstage.</p>

<p class="para">A young man hurrying past found that he&rsquo;d suddenly acquired an Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Scuse me, young man,&rdquo; said Nanny, still holding his arm, &ldquo;but d&rsquo;you know anyone around here called Agnes? Agnes Nitt?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can&rsquo;t say I do, ma&rsquo;am. What does she do?&rdquo; He made to hurry on as politely as possible, but Nanny&rsquo;s grip was steel.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She sings a bit. Big girl. Voice with double joints in it. Wears black.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t mean Perdita?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Perdita? Oh, yes. That&rsquo;d be her all right.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think she&rsquo;s seeing to Christine. They&rsquo;re in Mr. Salzella&rsquo;s office.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Would Christine be the thin girl in white?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, ma&rsquo;am.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And I expect you&rsquo;re going to show me where this Mr. Salzella&rsquo;s office is?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er, am I&mdash;Er, yes. It&rsquo;s just along the stage there, first door on the right.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What a good boy to help an old lady,&rdquo; said Nanny. Her grip increased to a few ounces short of cutting off circulation. &ldquo;And wouldn&rsquo;t it be a good idea if you helped young Walter back there do something respectful for the poor dead man?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Back where?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny turned around. The late Dr. Undershaft had gone nowhere, but Walter had vanished.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Poor chap was a bit upset, I shouldn&rsquo;t wonder,&rdquo; <a id="page164"></a>said Nanny. &ldquo;Only to be expected. So&hellip;how about if you got another strapping young lad to help you out instead?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What a good boy,&rdquo; Nanny repeated.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">It was mid-evening. Granny and Mrs. Plinge pushed their way through the crowds toward the Shades, a part of the city that was as thronged as a rookery, fragrant as a cesspit, and vice versa.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So,&rdquo; said Granny, as they entered the network of fetid alleys, &ldquo;your boy Walter usually sees you home, does he?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s a good boy, Mistress Weatherwax,&rdquo; said Mrs. Plinge defensively.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure you&rsquo;re grateful for a strong lad to lean on,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">Mrs. Plinge looked up. Looking into Granny&rsquo;s eyes was like looking into a mirror. What you saw looking back at you was yourself, and there was no hiding place.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They torment him so,&rdquo; she mumbled. &ldquo;They poke at him and hide his broom. They&rsquo;re not bad boys round here, but they will torment him.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He brings his broom home, does he?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He looks after his things,&rdquo; said Mrs. Plinge. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve always brought him up to look after his things and not be a trouble. But they will poke the poor soul and call him such names&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The alleyway opened into a yard, like a well between the high buildings. Washing lines crisscrossed the rectangle of moonlit sky.</p>
<a id="page165"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m just in here,&rdquo; said Mrs. Plinge. &ldquo;Much obliged to you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How does Walter get home without you?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, there&rsquo;s plenty of places to sleep in the Opera House. He knows that if I don&rsquo;t come for him he&rsquo;s to stop there for the night. He does what he&rsquo;s told, Mistress Weatherwax. He&rsquo;s never any trouble.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I never said he was.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Mrs. Plinge fumbled in her purse, as much to escape Granny&rsquo;s stare as to look for the key.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I expect your Walter sees most of what goes on in the Opera House,&rdquo; said Granny, taking one of Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s wrists in her hand. &ldquo;I wonder what your Walter&hellip;saw?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The pulse jumped at the same time as the thieves did. Shadows unfolded themselves. There was the scrape of metal.</p>

<p class="para">A low voice said, &ldquo;There&rsquo;s two of you, ladies, and there&rsquo;s six of us. There&rsquo;s no use in screaming.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, deary deary me,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">Mrs. Plinge dropped to her knees. &ldquo;Oh, please don&rsquo;t hurt us, kind sirs, we are harmless old ladies! Haven&rsquo;t you got mothers?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny rolled her eyes. Damn, damn and blast. She was a good witch. That was her role in life. That was the burden she had to bear. Good and Evil were quite superfluous when you&rsquo;d grown up with a highly developed sense of Right and Wrong. She hoped, oh she hoped, that young though these were, they were dyed-in-the-wool criminals&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I &rsquo;ad a mother once,&rdquo; said the nearest thief. <a id="page166"></a>&ldquo;Only I think I must of et &rsquo;er&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Ah. Top marks. Granny raised both hands to her hat to draw out two long hat pins&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">A tile slid off the roof, and splashed into a puddle.</p>

<p class="para">They looked up.</p>

<p class="para">A caped figure was visible for a moment against the moonlight. It thrust out a sword at arm&rsquo;s length. Then it dropped, landing lightly in front of one astonished man.</p>

<p class="para">The sword whirled.</p>

<p class="para">The first thief spun and thrust at the shadowy shape in front of him, which turned out to be another thief, whose arm jerked up and dragged its own knife along the rib cage of the thief beside him.</p>

<p class="para">The masked figure danced among the gang, his sword almost leaving trails in the air. It occurred to Granny later that it never actually made contact, but then, it never needed to&mdash;when six are against one in a m&ecirc;l&eacute;e in the shadows, and especially if those six aren&rsquo;t used to a target that is harder to hit than a wasp, and even more so if they got all their ideas of knife fighting from other amateurs, then there&rsquo;s six chances in seven that they&rsquo;ll stab a crony and about one chance in twelve that they&rsquo;ll nick their own earlobe.</p>

<p class="para">The two that remained uninjured after ten seconds looked at one another, turned, and ran.</p>

<p class="para">And then it was over.</p>

<p class="para">The surviving vertical figure bowed low in front of Granny Weatherwax. &ldquo;Ah. <span class="italic">Bella</span> Donna!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a swirl of black cloak and red silk, and it too was gone. For a moment soft footsteps could be heard skimming over the cobbles.</p>
<a id="page167"></a>

<p class="para">Granny&rsquo;s hand was still halfway to her hat.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well I never!&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">She looked down. Various bodies were groaning or making soft bubbling noises.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Deary deary me,&rdquo; she said. Then she pulled herself together.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I reckon we&rsquo;re going to need some nice hot water and some bits of bandage, and a good sharp needle for the stitching, Mrs. Plinge,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;We can&rsquo;t let these poor men bleed to death now, can we, even if they do try to rob old ladies&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Mrs. Plinge looked horrified.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got to be charitable, Mrs. Plinge,&rdquo; Granny insisted.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll pump up the fire and tear up a sheet,&rdquo; said Mrs. Plinge. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t know if I can find a needle&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, I &rsquo;spect I&rsquo;ve got a needle,&rdquo; said Granny, extracting one from the brim of her hat.</p>

<p class="para">She knelt down by a fallen thief. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s rather rusty and blunt,&rdquo; she added, &ldquo;but we shall have to do the best we can.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The needle gleamed in the moonlight. His round, frightened eyes focused on it, and then on Granny&rsquo;s face. He whimpered. His shoulder blades tried to dig him into the cobbles.</p>

<p class="para">It was perhaps as well that no one else could see Granny&rsquo;s face in the shadows.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s do some good,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Salzella threw his hands in the air. &ldquo;Supposing he&rsquo;d come down in the middle of the act?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right, all <span class="italic">right</span>,&rdquo; said Bucket, who was sitting behind his desk as a man might hide behind a <a id="page168"></a>bunker. &ldquo;I agree. After the show we call in the Watch. No two ways about it. We shall just have to ask them to be discreet.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Discreet? Have you ever met a Watchman?&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not that they&rsquo;ll find anything. He&rsquo;ll have been over the rooftops and away, you may depend upon it. Whoever he is. Poor Dr. Undershaft. He was always so highly strung.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Never more so than tonight,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That was tasteless!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella leaned over the desk. &ldquo;Tasteless or not, the company are theater people. Superstitious. One little thing like someone being murdered onstage and they go all to pieces.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He wasn&rsquo;t murdered onstage, he was murdered offstage. And we can&rsquo;t be <span class="italic">sure</span> it was murder! He&rsquo;d been very&hellip;depressed, lately.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes had been shocked, but it hadn&rsquo;t been shock at Dr. Undershaft&rsquo;s death. She&rsquo;d been astonished at her own reaction. It had been startling and unpleasant to see the man, but even worse to see herself actually being <span class="italic">interested</span> in what was happening&mdash;in the way people reacted, in the way they moved, in the things they said. It had been as if she&rsquo;d stood outside herself, watching the whole thing.</p>

<p class="para">Christine, on the other hand, had just folded up. So had Dame Timpani. Far more people had fussed over Christine than around the prima donna, despite the fact that Dame Timpani had come around and fainted again quite pointedly several times and had eventually been forced to go for hysterics. No one had assumed for a minute that Agnes couldn&rsquo;t cope.</p>
<a id="page169"></a>

<p class="para">Christine had been carried into Salzella&rsquo;s backstage office and put on a couch. Agnes had to fetch a bowl of water and a cloth and was wiping her forehead, for there are some people who are destined to be carried to comfortable couches and some people whose only fate is fetching a bowl of cold water.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Curtain goes up again in two minutes,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;I&rsquo;d better go and round up the orchestra. They&rsquo;ll all be in the Stab In The Back over the road. The swine can get through half a pint before the applause has died away.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Are they capable of playing?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They never have been, so I don&rsquo;t see why they should start now,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re <span class="italic">musicians</span>, Bucket. The only way a dead body would upset them is if it fell in their beer, and even then they&rsquo;d play if you offered them Dead Body Money.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket walked over to the recumbent Christine. &ldquo;How is she?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She keeps mumbling a bit&mdash;&rdquo; Agnes began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Cup of tea? Tea? Cup of tea, anyone? Nothing nicer than a cup of tea, well, I tell a lie, but I see the couch is occupied, just my little joke, no offense meant, anyone for a nice cup of tea?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes looked around in horror.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, <span class="italic">I</span> could certainly do with one,&rdquo; said Bucket, with false joviality.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How about you, miss?&rdquo; Nanny winked at Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;no, thank you&hellip;do you <span class="italic">work</span> here?&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m just helping out for Mrs. Plinge, who has been taken poorly,&rdquo; said Nanny, giving her another wink. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m Mrs. Ogg. Don&rsquo;t mind me.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page170"></a>

<p class="para">This seemed to satisfy Bucket, if only because random tea distributors represented the most minor of threats at this point.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s more like <span class="italic">Grand Guignol</span> than opera out there tonight,&rdquo; said Nanny. She nudged Bucket. &ldquo;&rsquo;S foreign for &lsquo;blood all over the stage,&rsquo;&rdquo; she said helpfully.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yep. It means&hellip;Big Gignol.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Music started in the distance.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s the overture to Act Two,&rdquo; said Bucket. &ldquo;Well, if Christine is still unwell, then&hellip;&rdquo; He looked desperately at Agnes. Well, at a time like this people would understand.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes&rsquo;s chest swelled further with pride. &ldquo;Yes, Mr. Bucket?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Perhaps we could find you a white&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Christine, her eyes still shut, raised her wrist to her forehead and groaned.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, dear, what happened?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket knelt down instantly. &ldquo;Are you all right? You had a nasty shock! Do you think you could go on for the sake of your art and people not asking for their money back?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She gave him a brave smile. Unnecessarily brave, it seemed to Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I can&rsquo;t disappoint the dear public!&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Jolly</span> good!&rdquo; said Bucket. &ldquo;I should hurry on out there, then. Perdita will help you&mdash;won&rsquo;t you, Perdita?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. Of course.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And you&rsquo;ll be in the chorus for the duet,&rdquo; said Bucket. &ldquo;<span class="italic">Nearby</span> in the chorus.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes sighed. &ldquo;Yes, I know. Come on, Christine.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page171"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Dear Perdita&hellip;&rdquo; said Christine.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny watched them go. Then she said, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll have that cup if you&rsquo;ve finished with it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh. Yes. Yes, it was very nice,&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;I had a bit of an accident up at the Boxes,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Bucket clutched at his chest. &ldquo;How many died?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, no one died, no one died. They got a bit damp because I spilled some champagne.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket sagged with relief. &ldquo;Oh, I wouldn&rsquo;t worry about that,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;When I say spilled&hellip;I mean, it went on happening&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He waved her away. &ldquo;It cleans up well off the carpet,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Does it stain ceilings?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mrs&hellip;.?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Please just go away.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny nodded, gathered up the teacups and wandered out of the office. If no one questioned an old lady with a tray of tea, they certainly weren&rsquo;t bothered about one behind a pile of washing-up. Washing-up is a badge of membership anywhere.</p>

<p class="para">As far as Nanny Ogg was concerned, washing-up was also something that happened to other people, but she felt that it might be a good idea to stay in character. She found an alcove with a pump and a sink in it, rolled up her sleeves, and set to work.</p>

<p class="para">Someone tapped her on the shoulder.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You shouldn&rsquo;t do that, you know,&rdquo; said a voice. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s very unlucky.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She glanced around at a stagehand.</p>
<a id="page172"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What, washing-up causes seven years&rsquo; bad luck?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You were whistling.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well? I always whistle when I&rsquo;m thinkin&rsquo;.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You shouldn&rsquo;t whistle onstage, I meant.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s unlucky?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I suppose you could say that. We use whistle codes when we&rsquo;re shifting the scenery. Having a sack of sandbags land on you <span class="italic">could</span> be unlucky, I suppose.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny glanced up. His gaze followed hers. Just here the ceiling was about two feet away.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s just safest not to whistle,&rdquo; the boy mumbled.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll remember that,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;No whistlin&rsquo;. Interestin&rsquo;. We do live and learn, don&rsquo;t we?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The curtain went up on Act Two. Nanny watched from the wings.</p>

<p class="para">The interesting thing was the way in which people contrived to keep one hand higher than their necks in case of <span class="italic">accidents</span>. There seemed to be far more salutes and waves and dramatic gestures than were strictly called for in the opera.</p>

<p class="para">She watched the duet between Iodine and Bufola, possibly the first in the history of the opera where both singers kept their eyes turned resolutely upward.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny enjoyed music, as well. If music were the food of love, she was game for a sonata and chips at any time. But it was clear that the sparkle had gone out of things tonight.</p>

<p class="para">She shook her head.</p>
<a id="page173"></a>

<p class="para">A figure moved through the shadows behind her, and reached out. She turned, and looked at a fearsome face.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, hello, Esme. How did you get in?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;ve still got the tickets so I had to talk to the man on the door. But he&rsquo;ll be right as rain in a minute or two. What&rsquo;s been happening?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well&hellip;the Duke&rsquo;s sung a long song to say that he must be going, and the Count has sung a song saying how nice it is in the springtime, and a dead body&rsquo;s fallen out of the ceiling.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That goes on a lot in opera, does it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shouldn&rsquo;t think so.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah. In the theater, I&rsquo;ve noticed, if you watch dead bodies long enough you can see them move.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Doubt if this one&rsquo;ll move. Strangled. Someone&rsquo;s murdering opera people. I bin chatting to the ballet girls.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Indeed?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s this Ghost they&rsquo;re all talking about.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hmm. Wears one of those black opera suits and a white mask?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How did you know that?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny looked smug.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean, I can&rsquo;t imagine who&rsquo;d want to murder opera people&hellip;&rdquo; Nanny thought of the expression on Dame Timpani&rsquo;s face. &ldquo;Except p&rsquo;raps other opera people. And p&rsquo;raps the musicians. And some of the audience, p&rsquo;raps.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t believe in ghosts,&rdquo; said Granny firmly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, Esme! You <span class="italic">know</span> I&rsquo;ve got a dozen of &rsquo;em in my house!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, I believe in <span class="italic">ghosts</span>,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Sad things hangin&rsquo; around goin&rsquo; woogy woogy woogy&hellip;but I <a id="page174"></a>don&rsquo;t believe they kill people or use swords.&rdquo; She walked away a little. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s too many ghosts here already.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny kept quiet. It was best to do so when Granny was listening without using her ears.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Gytha?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, Esme?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What does &lsquo;Bella Donna&rsquo; mean?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the nobby name for Deadly Nightshade, Esme.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought so. Huh! The cheek of it!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Only, in opera, it means Beautiful Woman.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really? Oh.&rdquo; Granny&rsquo;s hand reached up and patted the iron-hard bun of her hair. &ldquo;Foolishness!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">&hellip;he&rsquo;d moved like music, like someone dancing to a rhythm inside his head. And his face for a moment in the moonlight was the skull of an angel&hellip;</span></p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The duet got another standing ovation.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes faded gently back into the chorus. She had to do little else during the remainder of the act except dance, or at least move as rhythmically as she could, with the rest of the chorus during the Gypsy Fair, and listen to the Duke singing a song about how lovely the countryside was in summer. With an arm extended dramatically above his head.</p>

<p class="para">She kept peering into the wings.</p>

<p class="para">If Nanny Ogg was here then the other one would be around somewhere. She wished she&rsquo;d never written those wretched letters home. Well&hellip;they wouldn&rsquo;t drag her back, no matter what they tried&hellip;</p>
<a id="page175"></a>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The remainder of the opera passed without anyone dying, except where the score required them to do so at some length. There was a minor upset when a member of the chorus was almost brained by a sandbag dislodged from a gantry by the stagehands stationed there to prevent accidents.</p>

<p class="para">There was more applause at the end. Christine got most of it.</p>

<p class="para">And then the curtains closed.</p>

<p class="para">And opened and closed a few times as Christine took her bows.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes considered she took one more bow than the applause really justified. Perdita, looking out through her eyes, said: Of course she did.</p>

<p class="para">And then they closed the curtains for the last time.</p>

<p class="para">The audience went home.</p>

<p class="para">From the wings, and up in the flies, the stagehands whistled their commands. Parts of the world vanished into the aerial darkness. Someone went around and put out most of the lights. Rising like a birthday cake, the chandelier was winched into its loft so that the candles could be snuffed. Then there were the footsteps of the men leaving the loft&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Within twenty minutes of the last hand clap of applause the auditorium was empty and dark, except for just a few lights.</p>

<p class="para">There was the clank of a bucket.</p>

<p class="para">Walter Plinge walked onto the stage, if such a word could be employed for his mode of progress. He moved like a puppet on elastic strings, so that it seemed only coincidentally that his feet touched the ground.</p>
<a id="page176"></a>

<p class="para">Very slowly, and very conscientiously, he began to mop the stage.</p>

<p class="para">After a few minutes a shadow detached itself from the curtains and walked over to him. Walter looked down.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hello Mister Pussy Cat,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">Greebo rubbed against his legs. Cats have an instinct for anyone daft enough to give them food, and Walter certainly was well qualified.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I shall go and find you some milk shall I Mister Cat?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo purred like a thunderstorm.</p>

<p class="para">Walking his strange walk, advancing only by averages, Walter disappeared into the wings.</p>

<p class="para">There were two dark figures sitting in the balcony.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sad,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s got a good job in the warm and his mother keeps an eye on him,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;A lot of people fare worse.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not a big future for him, though,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Not when you think about it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There was a couple of cold potatoes and half a herring for their supper,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Hardly a stick of furniture, too.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shame.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mind you, she&rsquo;s a little bit richer now,&rdquo; Granny conceded. &ldquo;Especially if she sells all those knives and boots,&rdquo; she added to herself.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a cruel world for old ladies,&rdquo; said Nanny, matriarch of a vast extended tribe and undisputed tyrant of half the Ramtops.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Especially one as terrified as Mrs. Plinge,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>
<a id="page177"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, I&rsquo;d be frightened, too, if I was old and had Walter to think about.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I ain&rsquo;t talking about that, Gytha. I know about fear.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s true,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Most of the people you meet are full of fear.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mrs. Plinge is living in fear,&rdquo; said Granny, appearing not to hear this. &ldquo;Her mind is flat with it. She can&rsquo;t hardly think for the terror. I could feel it coming off of her like mist.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why? Because of the Ghost?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know yet. Not all of it, anyway. But I <span class="italic">will</span> find out.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny fished in the recesses of her clothing.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Fancy a drink?&rdquo; she said. There was a muffled <span class="italic">clink</span> from somewhere in her petticoats. &ldquo;I got champagne, brandy and port. Also some nibbles and biscuits.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Gytha Ogg, I believe you are a thief,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I ain&rsquo;t!&rdquo; said Nanny, and added, with that grasp of advanced morality that comes naturally to a witch: &ldquo;Just because I occasionally technic&rsquo;ly steal something, that doesn&rsquo;t make me a thief. I don&rsquo;t <span class="italic">think</span> thief.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s get back to Mrs. Palm&rsquo;s.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;But can we get something to eat first? I don&rsquo;t mind the cooking, but the grub there is a bit of an all-day breakfast, if you know what I mean&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a sound from the stage as they stood up. Walter had returned, followed by a slightly fatter Greebo. Oblivious to the watchers, he continued to mop the stage.</p>
<a id="page178"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;First thing tomorrow,&rdquo; said Granny, &ldquo;we&rsquo;ll go and see Mr. Goatberger the Almanack man again. I&rsquo;ve had time to think about what to do next. And then we&rsquo;re going to sort this out.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She glared at the innocent figure washing the stage and said, under her breath: &ldquo;What is it you know, Walter Plinge? What is it you&rsquo;ve seen?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;Wasn&rsquo;t it <span class="italic">amazing</span>?!&rdquo; said Christine, sitting up in bed. Her nightdress, Agnes had noted, was white. And extremely lacy.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Five curtain calls!! Mr. Bucket says that&rsquo;s more than anyone&rsquo;s ever had since Dame Gigli!! I&rsquo;m sure I won&rsquo;t be able to <span class="italic">sleep</span> for the excitement!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So you just drink up that lovely hot milk drink I&rsquo;ve done for us,&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;It took me ages to carry the saucepan up those stairs.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And the flowers!!&rdquo; said Christine, ignoring the mug Agnes had placed beside her. &ldquo;They started arriving right after the performance, Mr. Bucket said!! He said&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a soft knock at the door.</p>

<p class="para">Christine adjusted her dress.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Come!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The door opened and Walter Plinge shuffled in, hidden under the bouquets of flowers.</p>

<p class="para">After a few steps he stumbled on his own feet, plunged forward, and dropped them. Then he stared at the two girls in mute embarrassment, turned suddenly, and walked into the door.</p>

<p class="para">Christine giggled.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry mu-miss,&rdquo; said Walter.</p>
<a id="page179"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Thank you, Walter,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">The door closed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t he strange?! Have you seen the way he stares at me?! Do you think you could find some water for these, Perdita?!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Certainly, Christine. It&rsquo;s only seven flights of stairs.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And as a reward I shall drink this lovely drink you have made for me!! Has it got spices in it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh. yes. Spices,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not like one of those potions your witches cook up, is it?!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er, no,&rdquo; said Agnes. After all, everyone in Lancre used <span class="italic">fresh</span> herbs. &ldquo;Er&hellip;there&rsquo;s not going to be anything like enough vases for them all, even if I use the guzunder&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The what?!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The&hellip;you know. It&rsquo;s goes-under&hellip;the bed. Guzunder.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re so <span class="italic">funny</span>!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There won&rsquo;t be, anyway,&rdquo; said Agnes, blushing hotly. Behind her eyes, Perdita committed murder.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then put in all the ones from the earls and knights and I shall see to the others tomorrow!&rdquo; said Christine, picking up the drink.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes picked up the kettle and started toward the door.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Perdita, dear?&rdquo; said Christine, the mug halfway to her lips.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes turned.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It did seem to me you were singing the <span class="italic">teensiest</span> bit loud, dear! I&rsquo;m sure it must have been a little difficult for everyone to hear me.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry, Christine,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>
<a id="page180"></a>

<p class="para">She walked down in darkness. Tonight there was a candle burning in a niche on every second landing. Without them the stairs would have been merely dark; <span class="italic">with</span> them, shadows crept and leapt at every corner.</p>

<p class="para">She reached the pump in the little alcove by the stage manager&rsquo;s office, and filled the kettle.</p>

<p class="para">Out on the stage, someone began to sing.</p>

<p class="para">It was Peccadillo&rsquo;s part of a duet of three hours earlier, but sung without music and in a tenor voice of such tone and purity that the kettle dropped out of Agnes&rsquo;s hand and spilled cold water over her feet.</p>

<p class="para">She listened for a while, and then realized that she was singing the soprano part under her breath.</p>

<p class="para">The song came to an end. She could hear, far off, the hollow sound of footsteps retreating in the distance.</p>

<p class="para">She ran to the door to the stage, paused a moment, and then opened it and went forward and out onto the huge dim emptiness. The candles left burning were as much illumination as stars on a clear night. There was no one there.</p>

<p class="para">She walked into the center of the stage, and stopped, and caught her breath at the shock.</p>

<p class="para">She could <span class="italic">feel</span> the auditorium in front of her, the huge empty space making the sound that velvet would make if it could snore.</p>

<p class="para">It wasn&rsquo;t silence. A stage is never silent. It was the noise produced by a million other sounds that have never quite died away&mdash;the thunder of applause, the overtures, the arias. They poured down&hellip;fragments of tunes, lost chords, snatches of song.</p>

<p class="para">She stepped back, and trod on someone&rsquo;s foot.</p>
<a id="page181"></a>

<p class="para">Agnes spun around. &ldquo;Andr&eacute;, there&rsquo;s no&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Someone crouched back. &ldquo;Sorry miss!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes breathed out. &ldquo;Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry miss!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s all right! You just startled me.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Didn&rsquo;t see you miss!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter was holding something. To Agnes&rsquo;s amazement, the darker shape in the darkness was a cat, flopped over Walter&rsquo;s arms like an old rug and purring happily. It was like seeing someone poking their arm into a mincing machine to find out what was jamming it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s <span class="italic">Greebo</span>, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s a happy cat! He&rsquo;s full of milk!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter, why&rsquo;re you in the middle of the stage in the dark when everyone&rsquo;s gone home?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What were <span class="italic">you</span> doing miss?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">It was the first time she&rsquo;d heard Walter ask a question. And he&rsquo;s sort of a janitor, after all, she told herself. He&rsquo;s allowed to go anywhere.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&hellip;got lost,&rdquo; she said, ashamed at the lie. &ldquo;I&hellip;I&rsquo;ll be going up to my room now. Er. Did you hear someone singing?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All the time miss!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I meant just now.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Just now I&rsquo;m talking to you miss!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;G&rsquo;night miss!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She walked through the soft warm gloom to the backstage door, resisting at every step the urge to look round. She collected the kettle and hurried up the stairs.</p>

<p class="para">Behind her, on the stage, Walter carefully low<a id="page182"></a>ered Greebo to the floor, took off his beret, and removed something white and papery from inside it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What shall we listen to, Mister Cat? I know, we shall listen to the overture to <span class="italic">Die Flederleiv</span> by J. Q. Bubbla, cond. Vochua Doinov.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo gave him the fat-cheeked look of a cat prepared to put up with practically anything for food.</p>

<p class="para">And Walter sat down beside him and listened to the music coming out of the walls.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">When Agnes got back to the room Christine was already fast asleep, snoring the snore of those in herbal heaven. The mug lay by the bed.</p>

<p class="para">It wasn&rsquo;t a <span class="italic">bad</span> thing to do, Agnes reassured herself. Christine probably needed a good night&rsquo;s sleep. It was practically a kindly act.</p>

<p class="para">She turned her attention to the flowers. There were quite a lot of roses and orchids. Most of them had cards attached. Many aristocratic men apparently appreciated good singing or, at least, good singing that appeared to come from a face like Christine&rsquo;s.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes arranged the flowers Lancre fashion, which was to hold the pot with one hand and the bouquet in the other and forcibly bring the two into conjunction.</p>

<p class="para">The last bunch was the smallest, and wrapped in red paper. There was no card. In fact, there were no flowers.</p>

<p class="para">Someone had merely wrapped up half a dozen blackened and spindly rose stems and then, for some reason, sprayed them with scent. It was <a id="page183"></a>musky and rather pleasant, but a bad joke all the same. She threw them in the bin with the rubbish, blew out the candle, and sat down to wait.</p>

<p class="para">She wasn&rsquo;t certain for whom. Or what.</p>

<p class="para">After a minute or two she was aware that there was a glow coming from the waste bin. It was the barest fluorescence, like a sick glowworm, but it was there.</p>

<p class="para">She crawled across the floor and peered in.</p>

<p class="para">There were rosebuds on the dead sticks, transparent as glass, visible only by the glimmer on the edge of each petal. They flickered like marsh lights.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes lifted them out carefully and fumbled in the darkness for the empty mug. It wasn&rsquo;t the best of vases, but it would have to do. Then she sat and watched the ghostly flowers until&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&hellip;someone coughed. She jerked her head up, aware that she&rsquo;d fallen asleep.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Madam?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sir?!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The voice was melodious. It suggested that, at any minute, it might break into song.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Attend. Tomorrow you must sing the part of Laura in <span class="italic">Il Truccatore</span>. We have much to do. One night is barely enough. The aria in Act One will occupy much of our time.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a brief passage of violin music.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Your performance tonight was&hellip;good. But there are areas that we must build upon. Attend.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Did <span class="italic">you</span> send the roses?!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You like the roses? They bloom only in darkness.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who <span class="italic">are</span> you?! Was it you I heard singing just now!?&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page184"></a>

<p class="para">There was silence for a moment.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Then:</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Let us examine the role of Laura in <span class="italic">Il Truccatore&mdash;</span> &lsquo;The Master of Disguise&rsquo;, also sometimes vulgarly known as &lsquo;The Man with a Thousand Faces&rsquo;&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">When the witches arrived at Goatberger&rsquo;s offices next morning they found a very large troll sitting on the stairs. It had a club across its knees and held up a shovel-sized hand to prevent them going any farther.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No one&rsquo;s allowed in,&rdquo; it said. &ldquo;Mr. Goatberger is in a meetin&rsquo;.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How long is this meetin&rsquo; going to be?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Goatberger is a very elongated meeter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny gave the troll an appraising stare. &ldquo;You been in publishin&rsquo; long?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Since dis mornin&rsquo;,&rdquo; said the troll proudly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Goatberger gave you the job?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yup. Come up Quarry Lane and picked me special for&hellip;&rdquo;&mdash;the troll&rsquo;s brow creased as it tried to remember the unfamiliar words&mdash;&ldquo;&hellip;the fast track inna fast-movin&rsquo; worlda publishin&rsquo;.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And what exactly is your job?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Ead &rsquo;itter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Scuse me,&rdquo; said Nanny, pushing forward. &ldquo;I&rsquo;d know that strata anywhere. You&rsquo;re from Copperhead in Lancre, ain&rsquo;t you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So what?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;re from Lancre, too.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page185"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yeah?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is Granny Weatherwax, you know.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The troll gave her a disbelieving grin, and then its brow corrugated again, and then it looked at Granny.</p>

<p class="para">She nodded.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The one you boys call <span class="italic">Aaoograha hoa</span>, you know?&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;&lsquo;She Who Must Be Avoided&rsquo;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The troll looked at its club as if seriously considering the possibility of beating itself to death.</p>

<p class="para">Granny patted it on the lichen-encrusted shoulder. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s your name, lad?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Carborundum, miss,&rdquo; it mumbled. One of its legs began to tremble.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, I&rsquo;m sure you&rsquo;re going to make a good life for yourself here in the big city,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, why don&rsquo;t you go and start now?&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">The troll gave her a grateful look and fled, without even bothering to open the door.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Do they really call me that?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er. Yes,&rdquo; said Nanny, kicking herself. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a mark of respect, of course.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve always done my best to get along with trolls, you know that.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How about the dwarfs?&rdquo; said Granny, as someone might who had found a hitherto unsuspected boil and couldn&rsquo;t resist poking it. &ldquo;Have they got a name for me, too?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go and see Mr. Goatberger, shall we?&rdquo; said Nanny brightly.</p>
<a id="page186"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Gytha!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;well&hellip;I think it&rsquo;s <span class="italic">K&rsquo;ez&rsquo;rek d&rsquo;b&rsquo;duz</span>,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What does that mean?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;&lsquo;Go Around the Other Side of the Mountain&rsquo;,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny was uncharacteristically silent as they made their way up the stairs.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny didn&rsquo;t bother to knock. She opened the door and said, &ldquo;Coo-ee, Mr. Goatberger! It&rsquo;s us again, just like you said. Oh, I shouldn&rsquo;t try to get out of the window like that&mdash;you&rsquo;re three flights up and that bag of money is a bit dangerous if you&rsquo;re climbing around.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The man edged around the room so that his desk was between him and the witches.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Wasn&rsquo;t there a troll downstairs?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s decided to break out of publishing,&rdquo; said Nanny. She sat down and gave him a big smile. &ldquo;I &rsquo;spect you&rsquo;ve got some money for us.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Goatberger realized that he was trapped. His face contorted into a series of twisted expressions as he experimented with some replies. Then he smiled as widely as Nanny and sat down opposite her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Of course, things are very difficult at the moment,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;In fact I can&rsquo;t recall a worse time,&rdquo; he added, with considerable honesty.</p>

<p class="para">He looked at Granny&rsquo;s face. His grin stayed where it was but the rest of his face began to edge away.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;People just don&rsquo;t seem to be buying books,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And the cost of the etchings, well, it&rsquo;s wicked.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page187"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Everyone I knows buys the Almanack,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I reckon everyone in Lancre buys your Almanack. Everyone in the whole Ramtops buys the Almanack, even the dwarfs. That&rsquo;s a lot of half dollars. And Gytha&rsquo;s book seems to be doing very well.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, of course, I&rsquo;m glad it&rsquo;s so popular, but what with distribution, paying the peddlers, the wear and tear on&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Your Almanack will last a household all winter, with care,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Providing no one&rsquo;s ill and the paper&rsquo;s nice and thin.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;My son Jason buys <span class="italic">two</span> copies,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Of course, he&rsquo;s got a big family. The privy door never stops swinging&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes but, you see, the point is&hellip;I don&rsquo;t actually have to pay you <span class="italic">anything</span>,&rdquo; said Mr. Goatberger, trying to ignore this. His smile had the face all to itself now. &ldquo;You paid <span class="italic">me</span> to print it, and I gave you your money back. In fact I think our accounts department made a slight error in your favor, but I won&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">His voice trailed away.</p>

<p class="para">Granny Weatherwax was unfolding a sheet of paper. &ldquo;These predictions for next year&hellip;&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;d you get that?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I borrowed it. You can have it back if you like&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, what about them?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They&rsquo;re wrong.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do you mean, they&rsquo;re wrong? They&rsquo;re <span class="italic">predictions!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see there being a rain of curry in Klatch next May. You don&rsquo;t get curry that early.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page188"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You know about the predictions business?&rdquo; said Goatberger. &ldquo;You? I&rsquo;ve been printing predictions for years.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t do clever stuff for years ahead, like you do,&rdquo; Granny admitted. &ldquo;But I&rsquo;m pretty accurate if you want a thirty-second one.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Indeed? What&rsquo;s going to happen in thirty seconds?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny told him.</p>

<p class="para">Goatberger roared with laughter. &ldquo;Oh, yes, that&rsquo;s a good one, you should be writing them for us!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Oh, my word. Nothing like being ambitious, eh? That&rsquo;s better than the spontaneous combustion of the Bishop of Quirm, and that didn&rsquo;t even happen! In thirty seconds, eh?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Twenty-one seconds now,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Mr. Bucket had arrived at the Opera House early to see if anyone had died so far today.</p>

<p class="para">He made it as far as his office without a single body dropping out of the shadows.</p>

<p class="para">He really hadn&rsquo;t expected it to be like this. He&rsquo;d <span class="italic">liked</span> opera. It had all seemed so <span class="italic">artistic</span>. He&rsquo;d watched hundreds of operas and practically no one had died, except once during the ballet scene in <span class="italic">La Triviata</span> when a ballerina had rather over-enthusiastically been flung into the lap of an elderly gentleman in the front row of the Stalls. She hadn&rsquo;t been hurt, but the old man had died in one incredibly happy instant.</p>

<p class="para">Someone knocked at the door.</p>
<a id="page189"></a>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket opened it about a quarter of an inch. &ldquo;Who&rsquo;s dead?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;N&mdash;no one Mr. Bucket! I&rsquo;ve got your letters!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, it&rsquo;s you, Walter. Thank you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He took the bundle and shut the door.</p>

<p class="para">There were bills. There were always bills. The Opera House practically runs itself, they&rsquo;d told him. Well, yes, but it practically ran on money. He rummaged through the let&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">There was an envelope with the Opera House crest on it.</p>

<p class="para">He looked at it like a man looks at a very fierce dog on a very thin leash.</p>

<p class="para">It did nothing except lie there and look as gummed as an envelope can be.</p>

<p class="para">Finally he disembowelled it with the paper knife and then flung it down on the desk again, as if it would bite.</p>

<p class="para">When it did not do so he reached out hesitantly and withdrew the folded letter. It read as follows:</p>

<div class="extractLetter">

<p class="extractLetterSalutation"><span class="italic">My dear Bucket</span></p>
<br/>
<p class="extractLetterText"><span class="italic">I should be most grateful if Christine sings the role of Laura tonight. I assure you she is more than capable</span>.</p>

<p class="extractLetterText"><span class="italic">The second violinist is a little slow, I feel, and the second act last night was frankly extremely wooden. This really is not good enough</span>.</p>

<p class="extractLetterText"><span class="italic">May I extend my own welcome to Se&ntilde;or Basilica. I congratulate you on his arrival</span>.</p>

<br/>
<p class="extractLetterSignature"><span class="italic">Wishing you the very best,<br /> The Opera Ghost</span></p>
</div>
<a id="page190"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Salzella!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella was eventually located. He read the note. &ldquo;You do not intend to accede to this?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She <span class="italic">does</span> sing superbly, Salzella.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You mean the Nitt girl?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well&hellip;yes&hellip;you know what I mean.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But this is nothing less than blackmail!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Is it? He&rsquo;s not actually threatening anything.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You let her&hellip;I mean them, of course&hellip;you let them sing last night, and much good it did poor Dr. Undershaft.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do you advise, then?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was another series of disjointed knocks on the door.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Come in, Walter,&rdquo; said Bucket and Salzella together.</p>

<p class="para">Walter jerked in, holding the coal scuttle.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been to see Commander Vimes of the city Watch,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;He said he&rsquo;ll have some of his best men here tonight. Undercover.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought you said they were all incompetent.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella shrugged. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got to do this properly. Did you know Dr. Undershaft was strangled before he was hung?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hanged,&rdquo; said Bucket, without thinking. &ldquo;Men are hanged. It&rsquo;s dead meat that&rsquo;s hung.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Indeed?&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;I appreciate the information. Well, poor old Undershaft was strangled, apparently. And then he was hung.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really, Salzella, you do have a misplaced sense&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve finished now Mr. Bucket!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, thank you, Walter. You may go.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page191"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mr. Bucket!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter closed the door behind him, very conscientiously.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid it&rsquo;s working here,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;If you don&rsquo;t find some way of dealing with&hellip;are you all right, Mr. Bucket?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What?&rdquo; Bucket, who&rsquo;d been staring at the closed door, shook his head. &ldquo;Oh. Yes. Er. Walter&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What about him?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s&hellip;all right, is he?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, he&rsquo;s got his&hellip;funny little ways. He&rsquo;s harmless enough, if that&rsquo;s what you mean. Some of the stagehands and musicians are a bit cruel to him&hellip;you know, sending him out for a tin of invisible paint or a bag of nail holes and so on. He believes what he&rsquo;s told. Why?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh&hellip;I just wondered. Silly, really.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I suppose he is, technically.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, I meant&mdash;Oh, it doesn&rsquo;t matter&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Granny Weatherwax and Nanny Ogg left Goatberger&rsquo;s office and walked demurely down the street. At least. Granny walked demurely. Nanny leaned somewhat.</p>

<p class="para">Every thirty seconds she&rsquo;d say, &ldquo;How much was that again?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Three thousand, two hundred and seventy dollars and eighty-seven pence,&rdquo; said Granny. She was looking thoughtful.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought it was nice of him to look in all the ashtrays for all the odd coppers he could round up,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Those he could reach, anyway. How much was that again?&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page192"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Three thousand, two hundred and seventy dollars and eighty-seven pence.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve never had seventy dollars before,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t say just seventy dollars, I said&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, I know. But I&rsquo;m working my way up to it gradual. I&rsquo;ll say this about money. It really chafes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know why you have to keep your purse in your knicker leg,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the last place anybody would look.&rdquo; Nanny sighed. &ldquo;How much did you say it was?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Three thousand, two hundred and seventy dollars and eighty-seven pence.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m going to need a bigger tin.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re going to need a bigger chimney.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I could certainly do with a bigger knicker leg.&rdquo; She nudged Granny. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re going to have to be polite to me now I&rsquo;m rich,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed,&rdquo; said Granny, with a faraway look in her eyes. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t think I&rsquo;m not considering that.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She stopped. Nanny walked into her, with a tinkle of lingerie.</p>

<p class="para">The frontage of the Opera House loomed over them.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got to get back in there,&rdquo; Granny said. &ldquo;And into Box Eight.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Crowbar,&rdquo; said Nanny, firmly. &ldquo;A No. 3 claw end should do it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;re not your Nev,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Anyway, breaking in wouldn&rsquo;t be the same thing. We&rsquo;ve got to have a <span class="italic">right</span> to be there.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Cleaners,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;We could be cleaners, and&hellip;no, &rsquo;s not right me being a cleaner now, in my position.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page193"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, we can&rsquo;t have that, with you in your position.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny glanced down at Nanny as a coach pulled up outside the Opera House. &ldquo;O&rsquo; course,&rdquo; she said, artfulness dripping off her voice like toffee, &ldquo;we could always <span class="italic">buy</span> Box Eight.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Wouldn&rsquo;t work,&rdquo; said Nanny. People were hurrying down the steps with the cuff-adjusting, sticky looks of welcoming committees everywhere. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re scared of selling it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why not?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s people dying and the opera goes on. That means someone&rsquo;s prepared to sell his own grandmother if he&rsquo;d make enough money.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;d cost a fortune, anyway,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">She looked at Granny&rsquo;s triumphant expression and groaned. &ldquo;Oh, Esme! I was going to save that money for me old age!&rdquo; She thought for a moment. &ldquo;Anyway, it <span class="italic">still</span> wouldn&rsquo;t work. I mean, look at us, we don&rsquo;t look like the right kind of people&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Enrico Basilica got out of the coach.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But we <span class="italic">know</span> the right kind of people,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, Esme!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The shop bell tinkled in a refined tone, as if it were embarrassed to do something as vulgar as ring. It would have much preferred to give a polite cough.</p>

<p class="para">This was Ankh-Morpork&rsquo;s most prestigious dress shop, and one way of telling was the apparent absence of anything so crass as merchandise. The occasional carefully placed piece of expensive material merely hinted at the possibilities available.</p>
<a id="page194"></a>

<p class="para">This was not a shop where things were bought. This was an emporium where you had a cup of coffee and a chat. Possibly, as a result of that muted conversation, four or five yards of exquisite fabric would change ownership in some ethereal way, and yet nothing so crass as <span class="italic">trade</span> would have taken place.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shop!&rdquo; yelled Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">A lady appeared from behind a curtain and observed the visitors, quite possibly with her nose.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Have you come to the right entrance?&rdquo; she said. Madame Dawning had been brought up to be polite to servants and tradespeople, even when they were as scruffy as these two old crows.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;My friend here wants a new dress,&rdquo; said the dumpier of the two. &ldquo;One of the nobby ones with a train and a padded bum.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In black,&rdquo; said the thin one.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And we wants all the trimmings,&rdquo; said the dumpy one. &ldquo;Little handbag onna string, pair of glasses onna stick, the whole thing.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think perhaps that might be a <span class="italic">leetle</span> more than you&rsquo;re thinking of spending,&rdquo; said Madame Dawning.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How much is a leetle?&rdquo; said the dumpy one.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean that this is rather a <span class="italic">select</span> dress shop.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s why we&rsquo;re here. We don&rsquo;t want rubbish. My name&rsquo;s Nanny Ogg and this here is&hellip;Lady Esmerelda Weatherwax.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Madame Dawning regarded Lady Esmerelda quizzically. There was no doubt that the woman had a certain bearing. And she stared like a duchess.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;From Lancre,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg. &ldquo;And she could <a id="page195"></a>have a conservatory if she liked, but she doesn&rsquo;t want one.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;&rdquo; Madame Dawning decided to play along for a while. &ldquo;What style were you considering?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Something nobby,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I perhaps would like a <span class="italic">leetle</span> more guidance than that&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Perhaps you could show us some things,&rdquo; said Lady Esmerelda, sitting down. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s for the opera.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, you patronize the opera?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Lady Esmerelda patronizes <span class="italic">everything</span>,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg stoutly.</p>

<p class="para">Madame Dawning had a manner peculiar to her class and upbringing. She&rsquo;d been raised to see the world in a certain way. When it didn&rsquo;t act in that certain way she wobbled a bit but, like a gyroscope, eventually recovered and went on spinning just as if it had. If civilization were to collapse totally and the survivors were reduced to eating cockroaches, Madame Dawning would still use a napkin and look down on people who ate their cockroaches the wrong way around.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I will, er, show you some examples,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Excuse me <span class="italic">one</span> moment.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She scuttled into the long workrooms behind the shop, where there was considerably less gilt, and leaned against the wall and summoned her chief seamstress.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mildred, there are two <span class="italic">very</span> strange&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She stopped. They&rsquo;d <span class="italic">followed</span> her!</p>

<p class="para">They were wandering down the aisle between the rows of dressmakers, nodding at people and inspecting some of the dresses on the dummies.</p>
<a id="page196"></a>

<p class="para">She hurried back. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m <span class="italic">sure</span> you&rsquo;d prefer&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How much is this one?&rdquo; said Lady Esmerelda, fingering a creation intended for the Dowager Duchess of Quirm.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I am <span class="italic">afraid</span> that one is not for sale&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How much would it be if it was for sale?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Three hundred dollars, I believe,&rdquo; said Madame Dawning.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Five hundred seems about right,&rdquo; said Lady Esmerelda.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Does it?&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg. &ldquo;Oh, it does, does it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The dress was black. At least, in theory it was black. It was black in the same way that a starling&rsquo;s wing is black. It was black silk, with jet beads and sequins. It was black on holiday.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It looks about my size. We&rsquo;ll take it. Pay the woman, Gytha.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Madame&rsquo;s gyroscope precessed rapidly. &ldquo;Take it? Now? Five hundred dollars? Pay? Pay <span class="italic">now</span>? <span class="italic">Cash</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;See to it, Gytha.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, all <span class="italic">right</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg turned away modestly and raised her skirt. There was a series of rustlings and elasticated twangings, and then she turned around, holding a bag.</p>

<p class="para">She counted out fifty rather warm ten-dollar pieces into Madame Dawning&rsquo;s unprotesting hand.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And now we&rsquo;ll go back into the shop and have a poke around for the other stuff,&rdquo; said Lady Esmerelda. &ldquo;I fancy ostrich feathers myself. And one of those big cloaks the ladies wear. And one of those fans edged with lace.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why don&rsquo;t we get some great big diamonds while we&rsquo;re about it?&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg sharply.</p>
<a id="page197"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good idea.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Madame Dawning could hear them bickering as they ambled away up the aisle.</p>

<p class="para">She looked down at the money in her hand.</p>

<p class="para">She knew about old money, which was somehow hallowed by the fact that people had hung on to it for years, and she knew about new money, which seemed to be being made by all these upstarts that were flooding into the city these days. But under her powdered bosom she was an Ankh-Morpork shopkeeper, and knew that the best kind of money was the sort that was in her hand rather than someone else&rsquo;s. The best kind of money was mine, not yours.</p>

<p class="para">Besides, she was also enough of a snob to confuse rudeness with good breeding. In the same way that the really rich can never be mad (they&rsquo;re eccentric), so they can also never be rude (they&rsquo;re outspoken and forthright).</p>

<p class="para">She hurried after Lady Esmerelda and her rather strange friend. Salt of the earth, she told herself.</p>

<p class="para">She was in time to overhear a mysterious conversation.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m being punished, ain&rsquo;t I, Esme?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can&rsquo;t imagine what you&rsquo;re talking about, Gytha.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Just &rsquo;cos I had my little moment.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I really don&rsquo;t follow you. Anyway, you said you were at your wits&rsquo; end with thinking what you&rsquo;d do with the money.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but I&rsquo;d have quite liked to have been at my wits&rsquo; end on a big comfy <span class="italic">chase longyou</span> somewhere with lots of big strong men buyin&rsquo; me chocolates and pressin&rsquo; their favors on me.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page198"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Money don&rsquo;t buy happiness, Gytha.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I only wanted to rent it for a few weeks.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Agnes rose late, the music still ringing in her ears, and dressed in a dream. But she hung a bed sheet over the mirror first, just in case.</p>

<p class="para">There were half a dozen of the chorus dancers in the canteen, sharing a stick of celery and giggling.</p>

<p class="para">And there was Andr&eacute;. He was eating something absentmindedly while staring at a sheet of music. Occasionally he&rsquo;d wave his spoon in the air with a faraway look on his face, and then put it down and make a few notes.</p>

<p class="para">In mid-beat he caught sight of Agnes, and grinned. &ldquo;Hello. You look tired.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;ve missed all the excitement.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Have I?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The Watch have been here, talking to everyone and asking lots of questions and writing things down very slowly.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What sort of questions?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, knowing the Watch, probably &lsquo;Was it you what did it, then?&rsquo; They&rsquo;re rather slow thinkers.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh dear. Does that mean tonight&rsquo;s performance is canceled?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; laughed. He had a rather pleasant laugh. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think Mr. Bucket could possibly cancel it!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Even if people <span class="italic">are</span> dropping likes flies out of the flies.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why not?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;People have been queuing for tickets!&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page199"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He told her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s disgusting!&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;You mean they&rsquo;re coming because it might be dangerous?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Human nature, I&rsquo;m afraid. Of course, some of them want to hear Enrico Basilica. And&hellip;well&hellip;Christine seems popular&hellip;&rdquo; He gave her a sorrowful look.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t mind, honestly,&rdquo; lied Agnes. &ldquo;Um&hellip;how long have you worked here, Andre?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;only a few months. I&hellip;used to teach music to the Seriph&rsquo;s children in Klatch.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Um&hellip;what do you think about the Ghost?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He shrugged. &ldquo;Just some kind of madman, I suppose.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Um&hellip;do you know if he sings? I mean, is <span class="italic">good</span> at singing?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I heard that he sends little critiques to the manager. Some of the girls say they&rsquo;ve heard someone singing in the night, but they&rsquo;re always saying silly things.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Um&hellip;are there any secret passages here?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He looked at her with his head on one side. &ldquo;Who&rsquo;ve you been talking to?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The girls say there are. Of course, <span class="italic">they</span> say they see the Ghost all the time. And sometimes in two places at once.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why should they see him more?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Perhaps he just likes looking at young ladies. They&rsquo;re always practicing in odd corners. Besides, they&rsquo;re all half-crazed with hunger anyway.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t you <span class="italic">interested</span> in the Ghost? People have been killed!&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page200"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, people are saying it might have been Dr. Undershaft.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But he <span class="italic">was</span> killed!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He might have hanged himself. He&rsquo;d been very depressed lately. And he&rsquo;d always been a bit strange. Nervy. It&rsquo;s going to be a bit difficult without him, though. Here, I&rsquo;ve brought you a stack of old programs. Some of the notes may help, since you haven&rsquo;t been in the opera long.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes stared at them, unseeing.</p>

<p class="para">People were disappearing and the first thought that everyone had was that it was going to be inconvenient without them.</p>

<p class="para">The show must go on. Everyone said that. People said it all the time. Often they smiled when they said it, but they were serious all the same, under the smile. No one ever said <span class="italic">why</span>. But yesterday, when the chorus had been arguing about the money, everyone knew that they weren&rsquo;t actually going to refuse to sing. It was all a game.</p>

<p class="para">The show went on. She&rsquo;d heard all the stories. She&rsquo;d heard about shows continuing while fire raged around the city, while a dragon was roosting on the roof, while there was rioting in the streets outside. Scenery collapsed? The show went on. Leading tenor died? Then appeal to the audience for any student of music who knew the part, and give him his big chance while his predecessor&rsquo;s body cooled gently in the wings. Why? It was only a performance, for heaven&rsquo;s sake. It wasn&rsquo;t like something important. But&hellip;the show goes on. Everyone took this so much for granted that they didn&rsquo;t even think about it anymore, as though there were fog in their heads.</p>
<a id="page201"></a>

<p class="para">On the other hand&hellip;someone was teaching her to sing at night. A mysterious person sang songs on the stage when everyone had gone home. She tried to think of that voice belonging to someone who killed people. It didn&rsquo;t work. Maybe she&rsquo;d caught some of the fog and didn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">want</span> it to work. What sort of person could have that feel for music and kill people?</p>

<p class="para">She&rsquo;d been idly turning the pages of an old program and a name caught her eye.</p>

<p class="para">She quickly shuffled through the others beneath. There it was again. Not in every performance, and never in a major role, but it was there. Generally it played an innkeeper or a servant.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter Plinge?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;<span class="italic">Walter?</span> But&hellip;<span class="italic">he</span> doesn&rsquo;t sing, does he?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She held up a program and pointed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What? Oh, no!&rdquo; Andr&eacute; laughed. &ldquo;Good heavens&hellip;it&rsquo;s a&hellip;a kind of convenient name, I suppose. Sometimes someone has to sing a very minor part&hellip;perhaps a singer is in a role that they&rsquo;d rather not be remembered in&hellip;well, here, they just go down on the program as Walter Plinge. Lots of theaters have a useful name like that. Like A. N. Other. It&rsquo;s convenient for everyone.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But&hellip;<span class="italic">Walter Plinge</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, I suppose it started as a joke. I mean, can you imagine Walter Plinge onstage?&rdquo; Andr&eacute; grinned. &ldquo;In that little beret he wears?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What does he think about it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think he minds. It&rsquo;s hard to tell, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a crash from the direction of the kitchen, although it was really more of a crashendo&mdash;the long-drawn-out clatter that begins when a pile of <a id="page202"></a>plates begins to slip, continues when someone tries to grab at them, develops a desperate counter-theme when the person realizes they don&rsquo;t have three hands, and ends with the <span class="italic">roinroinroin</span> of the one miraculously intact plate spinning around and around on the floor.</p>

<p class="para">They heard an irate female voice.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter Plinge!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry Mrs. Clamp!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Damn thing keeps holding onto the edge of the pan! Let go, you wretched insect&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was the sound of crockery being swept up, and then a rubbery noise that could approximately be described as a <span class="italic">spoing</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Now</span> where&rsquo;s it gone?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t know Mrs. Clamp!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And what&rsquo;s that cat doing in here?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; turned back to Agnes and flashed her a sad smile. &ldquo;It is a little cruel, I suppose,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The poor chap is a bit daft.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not at all sure,&rdquo; said Agnes, &ldquo;that I&rsquo;ve met anyone here who isn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He grinned again. &ldquo;I know,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean, everyone acts as if it&rsquo;s only the music that matters! The plots don&rsquo;t make sense! Half the stories rely on people not recognizing their servants or wives because they&rsquo;ve got a tiny mask on! Large ladies play the part of consumptive girls! No one can act properly! No wonder everyone accepts me singing for Christine&mdash;that&rsquo;s practically <span class="italic">normal</span> compared to opera! It&rsquo;s an operatic kind of idea! There should be a sign on the door saying &lsquo;Leave your common sense here&rsquo;! If it wasn&rsquo;t for the music the whole thing would be ridiculous!&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page203"></a>

<p class="para">She realized he was looking at her with an opera face.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Of course, that&rsquo;s it, isn&rsquo;t it. It <span class="italic">is</span> the show that matters, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s <span class="italic">all</span> show.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not meant to be real,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not like theater. No one&rsquo;s saying, &lsquo;You&rsquo;ve got to pretend this is a big battlefield and that guy in the cardboard crown is really a king.&rsquo; The plot&rsquo;s only there to fill in time before the next song.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He leaned forward and took her hand. &ldquo;This must be wretched for you,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">No male had ever touched Agnes before, except perhaps to push her over and steal her sweets.</p>

<p class="para">She pulled her hand away.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I, er, better go and practice,&rdquo; she said, feeling the blush start.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You really picked up the role of Iodine very well,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I, er, have a private tutor,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then he&rsquo;s really studied opera, that&rsquo;s all I can say.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&hellip;think he has.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;Esme?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, Gytha?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not that I&rsquo;m complaining or anything&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;but why isn&rsquo;t it <span class="italic">me</span> who&rsquo;s being the posh opera patronizer?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Because you&rsquo;re as common as muck, Gytha.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh. Right.&rdquo; Nanny subjected this statement to some thought and couldn&rsquo;t see any point of inaccuracy that would sway a jury. &ldquo;Fair enough.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page204"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not as though <span class="italic">I</span> like this.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shall I do madam&rsquo;s feet?&rdquo; said the manicurist. She stared at Granny&rsquo;s boots and wondered if it might be necessary to use a hammer.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I got to admit, it&rsquo;s a nice hair style,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Madam has <span class="italic">marvelous</span> hair,&rdquo; said the hairdresser. &ldquo;What is the secret?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;ve got to make sure there&rsquo;s no newts in the water,&rdquo; said Granny. She looked at her reflection in the mirror over the washbasin, and went to look away&hellip;and then sneaked another glance. Her lips pursed. &ldquo;Hmm,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">At the other end, the manicurist had succeeded in getting Granny&rsquo;s boots and socks off. Much to her amazement there was revealed, instead of the corned and bunioned monstrosities she&rsquo;d been expecting, a pair of perfect feet. She didn&rsquo;t know where to start because there was nowhere to begin, but this manicure was costing twenty dollars and in those circumstances you damn well find something to do.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny sat beside their pile of packages and tried to work everything out on a scrap of paper. She didn&rsquo;t have Granny&rsquo;s gift for numbers. They tended to writhe under her gaze and add themselves up wrong.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Esme? I reckon we&rsquo;ve spent&hellip;probably more&rsquo;n a thousand dollars so far, and that&rsquo;s not including hirin&rsquo; the coach, and we haven&rsquo;t paid Mrs. Palm for the room.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You said nothing was too much trouble to help a Lancre girl,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">But I didn&rsquo;t say nothing was too much money, thought Nanny, and then scolded herself for think<a id="page205"></a>ing like that. But she was definitely feeling a little lighter in the underwear regions.</p>

<p class="para">There seemed to be a general consensus among the artisans of beauty that they&rsquo;d done what they could. Granny swiveled the chair around.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do you think?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg stared. She&rsquo;d seen many strange things in her life, some of them twice. She&rsquo;d seen elves and walking stones and the shoeing of a unicorn. She&rsquo;d had a farmhouse dropped on her head. But she&rsquo;d never seen Granny Weatherwax in rouge.</p>

<p class="para">All her normal expletives of shock and surprise fused instantly, and she found herself resorting to an ancient curse belonging to her grandmother.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, I&rsquo;ll be <span class="italic">mogadored</span>!&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Madam has extremely good skin,&rdquo; said the cosmetics lady.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Can&rsquo;t seem to do anything about it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be <span class="italic">mogadored</span>!&rdquo; said Nanny again.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Powder and paint,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Huh. Just another kind of mask. Oh, well.&rdquo; She gave the hairdresser a dreadful smile. &ldquo;How much do we owe you?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;thirty dollars?&rdquo; said the hairdresser. &ldquo;That is&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Give the w&hellip;man thirty dollars and another twenty to make up for his trouble,&rdquo; said Granny, clutching at her head.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Fifty dollars? You could buy a <span class="italic">shop</span> for&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Gytha!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, all <span class="italic">right</span>. &rsquo;Scuse me, I&rsquo;m just going to the bank.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page206"></a>

<p class="para">She turned away demurely, raised the hem of her skirt&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;twangtwingtwongtwang&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;and turned back with a handful of coins.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There you go, my good wo&hellip;sir,&rdquo; she said sourly.</p>

<p class="para">There was a coach waiting outside. It was the best Granny had been able to hire with Nanny&rsquo;s money. A footman held open the door as Nanny helped her friend aboard.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll go straight to Mrs. Palm&rsquo;s so&rsquo;s I can change,&rdquo; said Granny as they pulled away. &ldquo;And then to the Opera House. We ain&rsquo;t got much time.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Are you all right?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Never felt better.&rdquo; Granny patted her hair. &ldquo;Gytha Ogg, you wouldn&rsquo;t be a witch if you couldn&rsquo;t jump to conclusions, right?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny nodded. &ldquo;Oh, yes.&rdquo; There was no shame in it. Sometimes there wasn&rsquo;t time to do anything else but take a flying leap. Sometimes you had to trust to experience and intuition and general awareness and take a running jump. Nanny herself could clear quite a tall conclusion from a standing start.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So I&rsquo;ve no doubt at all that there&rsquo;s some kind of idea floating around in your mind about this Ghost&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well&hellip;sort of an idea, yes&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;A name, perhaps?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny shifted uncomfortably, and not only because of the money bags under her skirt.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I got to admit something crossed my mind. A kind of&hellip;feeling. I mean, you never can tell&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny nodded. &ldquo;Yes. It&rsquo;s all neat, isn&rsquo;t it? It&rsquo;s a lie.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page207"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You said last night you saw the whole thing!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s still a lie. Like the lie about masks.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What lie about masks?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The way people say they hide faces.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They <span class="italic">do</span> hide faces,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Only the one on the outside.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">No one took much notice of Agnes. The stage was being set for the new performance tonight. The orchestra was rehearsing. The ballerinas had been herded into their practice room. In various other rooms people were singing at cross-purposes. But no one seemed to want her to do anything.</p>

<p class="para">I&rsquo;m just a wandering voice, she thought.</p>

<p class="para">She climbed the stairs to her room and sat on the bed. The curtains were still drawn and, in the gloom, the strange roses glowed. She had rescued them from the bin because they were beautiful, but, in a way, she&rsquo;d have been happier if they weren&rsquo;t there. Then she could have believed she&rsquo;d imagined the whole thing.</p>

<p class="para">There was no sound from Christine&rsquo;s room. Telling herself that it was really <span class="italic">her</span> room <span class="italic">anyway</span>, and Christine had just been allowed to borrow it, Agnes went in.</p>

<p class="para">It was a mess. Christine had got up, got dressed&mdash;either that or a thorough but overenthusiastic burglar had gone through every drawer in the place&mdash;and gone. The bouquets that Agnes had put into whatever receptacles she could find last night were where she had left them. The others were where she had left them, too, and they were already dying.</p>

<p class="para">She caught herself wondering where she could <a id="page208"></a>find some jars and pots for them, and hated herself for it. It was as bad as saying &ldquo;poot!&rdquo; You might as well paint <span class="smallCaps">WELCOME</span> on yourself and lie down on the doorstep of the universe. It was no fun at all, having a wonderful personality. Oh&hellip;and good hair.</p>

<p class="para">And then she went and found pots for them anyway.</p>

<p class="para">The mirror dominated the room. It seemed to grow a little larger each time she looked at it.</p>

<p class="para">All right. She had to know, didn&rsquo;t she?</p>

<p class="para">Heart pounding, she felt around the edges of it. There was a little raised area that might have looked like part of the frame, but as her fingers moved across it there was a &ldquo;click&rdquo; and the mirror swung inward a fraction of an inch. When she pushed at it, it moved.</p>

<p class="para">She breathed out. And stepped in.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s disgusting!&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s pandering to the most depraved taste!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket shrugged. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not as though we&rsquo;re putting &lsquo;Good Chance of Seeing Someone Throttled on Stage&rsquo; on the posters,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But news has got around. People like&hellip;drama.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You mean the Watch didn&rsquo;t want us to shut down?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No. They just said we should mount guards like last night and they&rsquo;d take steps.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Steps to the nearest place of safety, no doubt.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t like it any more than you do, but it&rsquo;s gone too far. We need the Watch now. Anyway, there&rsquo;d be a riot if we closed. Ankh-Morpork has <a id="page209"></a>always enjoyed&hellip;excitement. We&rsquo;re completely sold out. The show must go on.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes,&rdquo; said Salzella nastily. &ldquo;Would you like me to slit a few throats in the second act? Just so no one feels disappointed?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Of course not,&rdquo; said Bucket. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want any deaths. But&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The &ldquo;but&rdquo; hung in the air like the late Dr. Undershaft.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella threw up his hands.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Anyway, I believe we are past the worst,&rdquo; said Mr. Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I hope so,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;s Se&ntilde;or Basilica?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mrs. Plinge is showing him his dressing room.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mrs. Plinge hasn&rsquo;t been murdered?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, no one has been found dead so far today,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That <span class="italic">is</span> good news.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, and it must be, oh, at least ten past twelve,&rdquo; said Salzella with an irony that Bucket quite failed to notice. &ldquo;I will go and fetch him up so that we can have lunch, shall I? It must be a good half an hour since he had a snack.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket nodded. After the director had gone he surreptitiously checked his desk drawers again. There was no letter. Perhaps it <span class="italic">was</span> over&hellip;Perhaps it was true what they were saying about the late doctor.</p>

<p class="para">Someone knocked at the door, four times. Only one person could achieve four knocks without any rhythm whatsoever.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Come in, Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter Plinge stumbled into the room. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s <a id="page210"></a>a lady!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;She&rsquo;s to see Mr. Bucket!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg poked her head around the door. &ldquo;Coo-ee,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only me.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s&hellip;Mrs. Ogg, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; said Mr. Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">There was something slightly worrying about the woman. He didn&rsquo;t recall her name on the list of employees. On the other hand, she was clearly around the place, she wasn&rsquo;t dead, and she made a decent cup of tea, so was it his worry if she wasn&rsquo;t getting paid?</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good gracious, I&rsquo;m not the <span class="italic">lady</span>,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m as common as muck, me, on the highest authority. No, <span class="italic">she&rsquo;s</span> waiting down in the foyer. I thought I&rsquo;d better nip around here and warn you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Warn me? Warn me about what? I don&rsquo;t have any other appointments this morning. Who is this lady?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Have you ever heard of Lady Esmerelda Weatherwax?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No. Should I?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Famous patron of the opera. Conservatories all over the place,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Pots of money, too.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really? But I&rsquo;m due to&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket looked out of the window. There was a coach and four horses outside. It had so much rococo ornamentation on it that it was surprising it ever managed to move.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, I&mdash;&rdquo; he began again. &ldquo;It is really very incon&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She ain&rsquo;t the sort of person who likes to be kept waiting,&rdquo; said Nanny, with absolute honesty. And then, because Granny had been getting on her nerves all morning and the initial embarrassment at Mrs. Palm&rsquo;s still rankled and there was a streak of <a id="page211"></a>mischief in Nanny a mile wide, she added, &ldquo;They say she was a famous courtesan in her younger days. They say she didn&rsquo;t like to be kept waiting then, either. Retired now, of course. So they say.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You know, I&rsquo;ve visited most of the major opera houses and I&rsquo;ve never heard the name,&rdquo; mused Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah, I heard she likes to keep her donations secret,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket&rsquo;s mental compass once again swung around to point due Money.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;d better show her up,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I could perhaps give her a few minutes&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No one ever gave Lady Esmerelda less than half an hour,&rdquo; said Nanny, and gave Bucket a wink. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll go and fetch her, shall I?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She bustled away, towing Walter behind her.</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket stared after her. Then, after a moment&rsquo;s thought, he got up and checked the set of his mustache in the mirror over the fireplace.</p>

<p class="para">He heard the door open and turned with his finest smile in place.</p>

<p class="para">It faded only slightly at the sight of Salzella, ushering the impressive bulk of Basilica in front of him. The little manager and interpreter fussed along beside him, like a tugboat.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah, Se&ntilde;or Basilica,&rdquo; said Bucket. &ldquo;I trust the dressing rooms are to your satisfaction?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Basilica gave him a blank smile while the interpreter spoke in Brindisian, and then replied.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Se&ntilde;or Basilica says they are fine but the larder isn&rsquo;t big enough,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Haha,&rdquo; said Bucket, and then stopped when no one else laughed.</p>
<a id="page212"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In fact,&rdquo; he said hurriedly, &ldquo;Se&ntilde;or Basilica will I&rsquo;m sure be very happy to hear that our kitchens have made a special effort to&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was <span class="italic">another</span> knock at the door. He hurried across and opened it.</p>

<p class="para">Granny Weatherwax stood there, but not for long. She pushed him aside and swept into the room.</p>

<p class="para">There was a choking noise from Enrico Basilica.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Which one of you is Bucket?&rdquo; she demanded.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;me&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny removed a glove and extended her hand. &ldquo;So sorry,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Ai am not used to important people opening their own doors. Ai am Esmerelda Weatherwax.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How charming. I&rsquo;ve heard so much about you,&rdquo; lied Bucket. &ldquo;Pray let me introduce you. No doubt you know Se&ntilde;or Basilica?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Of course,&rdquo; said Granny, looking Henry Slugg in the eye. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure Se&ntilde;or Basilica recalls the many happy times we&rsquo;ve had in other opera houses whose names I can&rsquo;t quite remember at the moment.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Henry grimaced a smile, and said something to the interpreter.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That is astonishing,&rdquo; said the interpreter. &ldquo;Se&ntilde;or Basilica has just said how fondly he recalls meeting you many times before at opera houses that have just slipped his mind at present.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Henry kissed Granny&rsquo;s hand, and looked up at her with pleading in his eyes.</p>

<p class="para">My word, thought Bucket, that look he&rsquo;s giving her&hellip;I wonder if they ever&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, uh, and this is Mr. Salzella, our director of music,&rdquo; he said, remembering himself.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Honored,&rdquo; said Salzella, giving Granny a firm <a id="page213"></a>handshake and looking her squarely in the eye. She nodded.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And what&rsquo;s the first thing you&rsquo;d take out of a burning house, Mr. Salzella?&rdquo; she inquired.</p>

<p class="para">He smiled politely. &ldquo;What would you like me to take, madam?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She nodded thoughtfully and let go of his hand.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;May I get you a drink?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;A small sherry,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella sidled up to Bucket as he was pouring the drink. &ldquo;Who the hell is she?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Apparently she&rsquo;s rolling in money,&rdquo; whispered Bucket. &ldquo;And very keen on opera.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Never heard of her.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, Se&ntilde;or Basilica has, and that&rsquo;s good enough for me. Make yourself pleasant to them, will you, while I try to sort out lunch.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He pulled open the door and tripped over Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry!&rdquo; said Nanny, standing up and giving him a cheerful grin. &ldquo;These doorknobs are a bugger to polish, aren&rsquo;t they?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er, Mrs.&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;Ogg, could you run along to the kitchens and tell Mrs. Clamp there will be another one for lunch, please.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Right you are.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny bustled away. Bucket nodded approvingly. What a reliable old lady, he thought.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">It wasn&rsquo;t exactly a <span class="italic">secret</span>. When the room had been divided a space had been left between the walls. At <a id="page214"></a>the far end it opened onto a staircase, a perfectly ordinary staircase, which even had some grubby daylight via a dirt-encrusted window.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes was vaguely disappointed. She had expected, well, a <span class="italic">real</span> secret passage, perhaps with a few torches flickering secretly in rather valuable secret wrought-iron holders. But the staircase had just been walled off from the rest of the place at some time. It wasn&rsquo;t secret&mdash;it had merely been forgotten.</p>

<p class="para">There were cobwebs in the corners. The cocoons of extinct flies hung down from the ceiling. The air smelled of long-dead birds.</p>

<p class="para">But there was a clear track through the dust. Someone had used the stairs several times.</p>

<p class="para">She hesitated between up and down, and headed up. That was no great journey&mdash;after one more flight it ended at a trapdoor that wasn&rsquo;t even bolted.</p>

<p class="para">She pushed at it, and then blinked in the unaccustomed light. Wind caught at her hair. A pigeon stared at her, and flew away as she poked her head into the fresh air.</p>

<p class="para">The door had opened out onto the Opera House&rsquo;s roof, just one more item in a forest of sky-lights and air shafts.</p>

<p class="para">She went back inside and headed downward. And became aware, as she did so, of the voices&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">The old stairs hadn&rsquo;t been <span class="italic">totally</span> forgotten. Someone had at least seen their usefulness as an air shaft. Voices filtered up. There were scales, distant music, snatches of conversation. As she went down she passed through layers of noise, like a very carefully made sundae of sound.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>
<a id="page215"></a>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Greebo sat on top of the kitchen cupboard and watched the performance with interest.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Use the ladle, why don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; said a scene shifter.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It won&rsquo;t reach! Walter!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mrs. Clamp?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Give me that broom!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mrs. Clamp!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo looked up at the high ceiling, to which was affixed a sort of thin, ten-pointed star.</p>

<p class="para">In the middle of it was a pair of very frightened eyes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&lsquo;Plunge it into boiling water,&rsquo;&rdquo; said Mrs. Clamp, &ldquo;that&rsquo;s what it said in the cookbook. It never said &lsquo;Watch out, it&rsquo;ll grip the sides of the pot and spring straight up in the air&mdash;&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She flailed around with the broom handle. The squid shrank back.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And that pasta&rsquo;s all gone wrong,&rdquo; she muttered. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve had it grilling for hours and it&rsquo;s still hard as nails, the wretched stuff.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Coo-ee, it&rsquo;s only me,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg, poking her head around the door, and such was the all-embracing nature of her personality that even those who didn&rsquo;t know who she was took this on trust. &ldquo;Having a bit of trouble, are you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She surveyed the scene, including the ceiling. There was a smell of burning pasta in the air.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;This&rsquo;d be the special lunch for Senior Basilica, would it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It was <span class="italic">meant</span> to be,&rdquo; said the cook, still making ineffectual swipes. &ldquo;Blasted thing won&rsquo;t come down, though.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Other pots were simmering on the long iron <a id="page216"></a>range. Nanny nodded toward them. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s everyone else having?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mutton and clootie dumplings, with slumpie,&rdquo; said the cook.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah. Good, honest food,&rdquo; said Nanny, speaking of wall-to-wall suet oiled with lard.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And there&rsquo;s supposed to be Jammy Devils for pudding and I&rsquo;ve been so tied up with this wretched thing I haven&rsquo;t even made a start!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny carefully took the broom out of the cook&rsquo;s hands. &ldquo;Tell you what,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;you make enough dumplings and slumpie for five people, and I&rsquo;ll help by knocking up a quick pudding, how about that?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, that&rsquo;s a very handsome offer, Mrs.&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The jam&rsquo;s in the jar by&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, I won&rsquo;t bother about jam,&rdquo; said Nanny. She looked at the spice rack, grinned, and then stepped behind a table for modesty&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;twingtwangtwongtwang&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;&ldquo;Got any chocolate?&rdquo; she said, producing a slim volume. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve got a recipe right here that might be fun&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She licked her thumb and opened the book at page 53. Chocolate Delight with Special Secret Sauce.</p>

<p class="para">Yes, thought Nanny, that <span class="italic">would</span> be fun.</p>

<p class="para">If people wanted to go around teaching people lessons, other people should remember that those people knew a thing or two about people.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Scraps of conversation floated out of the walls as Agnes wound her secret way down the forgotten stairs.</p>
<a id="page217"></a>

<p class="para">It was&hellip;thrilling.</p>

<p class="para">No one was saying anything important. There were no convenient guilty secrets. There were just the sounds of people getting through the day. But they were <span class="italic">secret</span> sounds.</p>

<p class="para">It was wrong to listen, of course.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes had been brought up in the knowledge that a lot of things were wrong. It was wrong to listen at doors, to look people directly in the eye, to talk out of turn, to answer back, to <span class="italic">put yourself forward&hellip;</span></p>

<p class="para">But behind the walls she could be the Perdita she&rsquo;d always wanted to be. Perdita didn&rsquo;t care about anything. Perdita got things done. Perdita could wear anything she wanted. Perdita X Nitt, mistress of the darkness, magdalen of cool, could listen in to other people&rsquo;s lives. And never, ever have to have a wonderful personality.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes knew she should go back up to her room. Whatever lay in the increasingly shadowy depths was probably something she ought not to find.</p>

<p class="para">Perdita continued downward. Agnes went along for the ride.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The pre-luncheon drinks were going quite well, Mr. Bucket thought. Everyone was making polite conversation and absolutely no one had been killed up to the present moment.</p>

<p class="para">And it had been very gratifying to see the tears of gratitude in Se&ntilde;or Basilica&rsquo;s eyes when he was told that the cook was preparing a special Brindisian meal, just for him. He&rsquo;d seemed quite overcome.</p>

<p class="para">It was reassuring that he knew Lady Esmerelda. <a id="page218"></a>There was something about the woman that left Mr. Bucket terribly perplexed. He was finding it a little difficult to converse with her. As a conversational gambit, &ldquo;Hello, I understand you have a lot of money, can I have some please?&rdquo; lacked, he felt, a certain subtlety.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So, er, madam,&rdquo; he ventured, &ldquo;what brings you to our, er, city?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought perhaps I could come and spend some money,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Got rather a lot of it, you know. Keep havin&rsquo; to change banks &rsquo;cos they get filled up.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Somewhere in Bucket&rsquo;s tortured brain, part of his mind went &ldquo;whoopee&rdquo; and clicked its heels.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure if there&rsquo;s anything I can do&mdash;&rdquo; he murmured.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;As a matter of fact, there is,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I was thinking of&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A gong banged.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; said Mr. Bucket. &ldquo;Luncheon is served.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He extended his arm to Granny, who gave it an odd look before remembering who she was and taking it.</p>

<p class="para">There was a small exclusive dining room off his office. It contained a table set for five and, looking rather fetching in a waitress&rsquo;s lacy bonnet, Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">She bobbed a curtsy.</p>

<p class="para">Enrico Basilica made a tiny strangling noise at the back of his throat.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Scuse me, there&rsquo;s been a bit of a problem,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who&rsquo;s dead?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, no one&rsquo;s dead,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the dinner, <a id="page219"></a>it&rsquo;s still alive and hangin&rsquo; on to the ceiling. And the pasta&rsquo;s all gone black, see. I said to Mrs. Clamp, I said, it may be foreign but I don&rsquo;t reckon it should be crunchy&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is terrible! What a way to treat an honored guest!&rdquo; said Bucket. He turned to the interpreter. &ldquo;Please assure Se&ntilde;or Basilica that we will send out for fresh pasta straight away. What were we having, Mrs. Ogg?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Roast mutton with clootie dumplings,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Behind the face of Se&ntilde;or Basilica the throat of Henry Slugg made another little growling sound.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And there&rsquo;s some nice slumpie with a knob of butter,&rdquo; Nanny went on.</p>

<p class="para">Bucket looked around, puzzled. &ldquo;Is there a dog somewhere in here?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, I for one don&rsquo;t believe in pandering to singers,&rdquo; said Granny Weatherwax. &ldquo;Fancy food, indeed! I never heard the like! Why not give him mutton with the rest of us?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, Lady Esmerelda, that&rsquo;s hardly a way to treat&mdash;&rdquo; Bucket began.</p>

<p class="para">Enrico&rsquo;s elbow nudged his interpreter, with the special nudge of a man who could see clootie dumplings vanishing into the long grass if he weren&rsquo;t careful. He rumbled out a very pointed sentence.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Se&ntilde;or Basilica says he would be more than happy to taste the indigenous food of Ankh-Morpork,&rdquo; said the interpreter.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, we really can&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo; Bucket tried again.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In fact Se&ntilde;or Basilica <span class="italic">insists</span> that he tries the indigenous food of Ankh-Morpork,&rdquo; said the interpreter.</p>
<a id="page220"></a>
</div>
</body>
</html>
