<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:ops="http://www.w3.org/2007/ops" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xml:lang="en">

<head>
<link href="pdlmsr.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
<title>Begin Reading</title>
</head>
<body>
<div class="chapter">
<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;S&rsquo;right. Si,&rdquo; said Basilica.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;And give him some beer while you&rsquo;re about it.&rdquo; She gave the tenor&rsquo;s stomach a playful poke, losing her finger down to the second joint. &ldquo;Why, in a day or two I expect you could practically turn him into a native!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The wooden stairs gave way to stone.</p>

<p class="para">Perdita said: He&rsquo;ll have a vast cave somewhere under the Opera House. There will be hundreds of candles, casting an exciting yet romantic light over the, yes, the lake, and there will be a dinner table shining with crystal glass and silverware, and of course he will have, yes, a huge organ&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes blushed hotly in the darkness.</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;on which, that is to say, he will play in a virtuoso style many operatic classics.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes said: It&rsquo;ll be damp. There will be rats.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;Another clootie dumpling, Senior?&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mmfmmfmmf!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Take two while you&rsquo;re about it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">It was an education watching Enrico Basilica eat. It wasn&rsquo;t as though he gobbled his food, but he did eat continuously, like a man who intends to go on doing it all day on industrial lines, his napkin tucked neatly into his collar. The fork was loaded while the current consignment was being thoroughly masticated, so that the actual time between mouthfuls was as small as possible. Even Nanny, no stranger to a metabolism going for the burn, was  <a id="page221"></a>impressed. Enrico Basilica ate like a man freed at last from the tyranny of tomatoes with everything.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll order another mint-sauce tanker, shall I?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket turned to Granny Weatherwax. &ldquo;You were saying that you might be inclined to patronize our Opera House,&rdquo; he murmured.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Is Se&ntilde;or Basilica going to sing tonight?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mmfmmf.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I hope so,&rdquo; muttered Salzella. &ldquo;That or explode.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then I shall definitely want to be there,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;A little more lamb here, my good woman.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes ma&rsquo;am,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg, making a face at the back of Granny&rsquo;s head.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;seats for tonight, in fact, are&mdash;&rdquo; Bucket began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;A Box would do me,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not fussy.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In fact, even the Boxes are&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How about Box Eight? I&rsquo;ve heard as Box Eight is always empty.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket&rsquo;s knife rattled on his plate. &ldquo;Er, Box Eight, Box Eight, you see, we don&rsquo;t&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I was thinking of donating a little something,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But Box Eight, you see, although technically unsold, is&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Two thousand dollars was what I had in mind,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Oh, dear me, your waitress has let her dumplings go all over the place. It&rsquo;s so difficult to get reliable and <span class="italic">polite</span> staff these days, ain&rsquo;t it&hellip;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella and Bucket stared at one another across the table.<a id="page222"></a></p>


<p class="para">Then Bucket said, &ldquo;Excuse me, my lady, I must just have a brief discussion with my director of music.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The two men hurried to the far end of the room, where they began to argue in whispers.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Two thousand dollars!&rdquo; hissed Nanny, watching them.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It might not be enough,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re both looking very red in the face.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but <span class="italic">two thousand dollars</span>!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s only money.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but it&rsquo;s only my money, not only your money,&rdquo; Nanny pointed out.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We witches have always held everything in common, you know that,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, <span class="italic">yes</span>,&rdquo; said Nanny, and once again cut to the heart of the sociopolitical debate. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s easy to hold everything in common when no one&rsquo;s got anything.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Why, Gytha Ogg,&rdquo; said Granny, &ldquo;I thought you despised riches!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Right, so I&rsquo;d like to get the chance to despise them up close.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But I knows you, Gytha Ogg. Money&rsquo;d spoil you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;d just like the chance to prove that it wouldn&rsquo;t, that&rsquo;s all I&rsquo;m saying.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hush, they&rsquo;re coming back&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket approached, smiled uneasily, and sat down. &ldquo;Er,&rdquo; he began, &ldquo;it has to be Box Eight, does it? Only we could perhaps persuade someone in one of the other&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Wouldn&rsquo;t hear of it,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve heard that there&rsquo;s no one ever seen in Box Eight.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;haha&hellip;it&rsquo;s laughable, I know, but there <a id="page223"></a>are some old theatrical traditions associated with Box Eight, absolute rubbish of course, but&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He left the &ldquo;but&rdquo; hanging there hopefully. It froze in the face of Granny&rsquo;s stare.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You see, it&rsquo;s haunted,&rdquo; he mumbled.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh lawks,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg, vaguely remembering to stay in character. &ldquo;Another vat of slumpie, Senior Basilica? And how about another quart of beer?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mmfmmf,&rdquo; said the tenor encouragingly, taking time out from his eating to point a fork at his empty mug.</p>

<p class="para">Granny went on staring.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Excuse me,&rdquo; said Bucket again.</p>

<p class="para">He and Salzella went into another huddle, out of which came sounds like &ldquo;But <span class="italic">two thousand dollars</span>! That&rsquo;s a lot of shoes!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket surfaced again. His face was gray. Granny&rsquo;s stare could do that to people.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;because of the danger, er, which of course doesn&rsquo;t exist, haha, we&hellip;that is, the management&hellip;feel it incumbent on us to insist, that is, politely request, that if you do enter Box Eight you do so in company with a&hellip;man.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He ducked slightly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;A man?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;For protection,&rdquo; said Bucket in a little voice.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Although who&rsquo;d protect <span class="italic">him</span> we really couldn&rsquo;t say,&rdquo; said Salzella under his breath.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We thought perhaps one of the staff&hellip;&rdquo; Bucket mumbled.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ai am quate capable of finding my own man should the need arise,&rdquo; said Granny, in a voice with snow on it.<a id="page224"></a></p>


<p class="para">Bucket&rsquo;s polite reply died in his throat when he saw, just behind Lady Esmerelda, Mrs. Ogg grinning like a full moon.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Anyone for pudding?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">She held a big bowl on a tray. There seemed to be a haze over it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;My word,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;that looks delicious!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Enrico Basilica looked over the top of his food with the expression of a man who has had the amazing privilege of going to heaven while still alive.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mmmf!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">It <span class="italic">was</span> damp. And, with the demise of Mr. Pounder, there were indeed rats.</p>

<p class="para">The stone looked old, too. Of course, all stone was old, Agnes told herself, but this had grown old as masonry. Ankh-Morpork had been here for thousands of years. Where other cities were built on clay or rock or loam, Ankh-Morpork was built on Ankh-Morpork. People constructed new buildings on the remains of earlier ones, knocking out a few doorways here and there to turn ancient bedrooms into cellars.</p>

<p class="para">The stairs petered out on damp flagstones, in almost total darkness.</p>

<p class="para">Perdita thought it looked romantic and gothic.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes thought it looked gloomy.</p>

<p class="para">If someone used this place they&rsquo;d need lights, wouldn&rsquo;t they? And a fumbling search confirmed it. She found a candle and some matches tucked into a niche in the wall.</p>

<p class="para">That was sobering for Agnes and Perdita together. Someone used this prosaic book of matches with a picture of a grinning troll on the cover, and this piece <a id="page225"></a>of perfectly ordinary candle. Perdita would have preferred a flaming torch. Agnes didn&rsquo;t know <span class="italic">what</span> she would have preferred. It was just that, if a mysterious person came and sang in the walls, and moved around the place like a ghost, and possibly killed people&hellip;well, you&rsquo;d prefer a bit more style than a box of matches with a picture of a grinning troll on it. That was the sort of thing a <span class="italic">murderer</span> would use.</p>

<p class="para">She lit the candle and, in two minds about it all, went on into the dark.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Chocolate Delight with Special Secret Sauce was a great success and heading down the little red lane as though hot-wired.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;More, Mr. Salzella?&rdquo; said Bucket. &ldquo;This really is first-class stuff, isn&rsquo;t it? I must congratulate Mrs. Clamp.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There is a certain piquancy, I must say,&rdquo; said the director of music. &ldquo;How about you, Se&ntilde;or Basilica?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mmmf.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Lady Esmerelda?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t mind if I do,&rdquo; said Granny, passing her plate across.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure I detect a hint of cinnamon,&rdquo; said the interpreter, a brown ring around his mouth.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Indeed, and possibly just a trace of nutmeg,&rdquo; said Mr. Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought&hellip;cardamom?&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Creamy yet spicy,&rdquo; said Bucket. His eyes unfocused slightly. &ldquo;And curiously&hellip;warming.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny stopped chewing, and looked down suspiciously at her plate.</p>

<p class="para">Then she sniffed at her spoon.<a id="page226"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Is it, er&hellip;is it just me, or is it a trifle&hellip;<span class="italic">warm</span> in here?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella had gripped the arms of his chair. His forehead glistened. &ldquo;Do you think we could open a window?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I feel a little&hellip;strange.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, by all means,&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella half-rose, and then a preoccupied expression suffused his features. He sat down suddenly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, I rather believe I&rsquo;ll just sit quietly for a moment,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, dear,&rdquo; said the interpreter. There was a hint of vapor around his collar.</p>

<p class="para">Basilica tapped him politely on the shoulder, grunted hopefully, and made pass-it-here motions in the direction of the half-finished dish of chocolate pudding.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mmmf?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, <span class="italic">dear</span>,&rdquo; said the interpreter.</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket ran a finger around his collar. Sweat was beginning to roll down his face.</p>

<p class="para">Basilica gave up on his stricken colleague and reached across in a businesslike way to hook the dish with his fork.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;yes,&rdquo; said Bucket, trying to keep his eyes away from Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes&hellip;indeed,&rdquo; said Salzella, his voice coming from a long way away.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, <span class="italic">dear</span>,&rdquo; said the interpreter, his eyes watering. &ldquo;Ai! Meu Deus! Dio Mio! O Goden! D&rsquo;zuk f&rsquo;t! Aagorahaa!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Se&ntilde;or Basilica upended the rest of the Special Secret Sauce onto his plate and carefully scraped out the dish with his spoon, holding it upside-down to reach the last little bit.<a id="page227"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;The weather has been a little&hellip;cool of late,&rdquo; Bucket managed. &ldquo;Very <span class="italic">cold</span>, in fact.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Enrico held the sauce dish up to the light and regarded it critically in case there was any drop hiding in a corner.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Snow, ice, frost&hellip;that sort of thing,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;Yes, indeed! Coldness of all descriptions, in fact.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes! Yes!&rdquo; said Bucket gratefully. &ldquo;And at a time like this I think it is very important to try to remember the names of, say, any number of boring and hopefully chilly things!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Wind, glaciers, icicles&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not icicles!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; said the interpreter, and slumped forward into his plate. His head hit a spoon, which cart-wheeled into the air and bounced off Enrico&rsquo;s head.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella started to whistle under his breath and pound the arm of his chair.</p>

<p class="para">Bucket blinked. In front of him was the water jug. The <span class="italic">cold</span> water jug. He reached out&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, oh, <span class="italic">oh</span>, dear me, what can I say, I seem to have spilled it all over myself,&rdquo; he said, through the rising clouds of steam. &ldquo;What a butterfingers I am, to be sure. I shall ring for Mrs. Ogg to bring us another one.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;And perhaps you would care to do it soon? I am also feeling very&hellip;accident-prone.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Basilica, still chewing, lifted his interpreter&rsquo;s head off the table and carefully tipped the man&rsquo;s unfinished pudding into his own plate.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In fact, in fact, in fact,&rdquo; said Salzella, &ldquo;I think I <a id="page228"></a>shall just&hellip;have a brisk&hellip;have a nice cold&hellip;if you would excuse me a minute&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He pushed back his chair and fled the room in a kind of crouching gait.</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket glistened. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll just, I&rsquo;ll just, I&rsquo;ll just&hellip;be back quite shortly,&rdquo; he said, and scurried away.</p>

<p class="para">There was silence, broken only by the scrape of Se&ntilde;or Basilica&rsquo;s spoon and a sizzling noise from the interpreter.</p>

<p class="para">Then the tenor belched baritone. &ldquo;Whoops, pardon my Klatchian,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Oh&hellip;<span class="italic">damn</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He appeared to notice the depleted table for the first time. He shrugged, and smiled hopefully at Granny. &ldquo;Is there a cheese board, do you think?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">The door flew open and Nanny Ogg burst in, holding a bucket of water in both hands.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right, all right, that&rsquo;s&mdash;&rdquo; she began, and then stopped.</p>

<p class="para">Granny dabbed primly at the corners of her mouth with her napkin. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry, Mrs. Ogg?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny looked at the empty dish in front of Basilica.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Or perhaps some fruit?&rdquo; said the tenor. &ldquo;A few nuts?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How much has he had?&rdquo; she whispered.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Best part of half,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;But I don&rsquo;t reckon it&rsquo;s having any effect on account of not touching the sides.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny turned her attention to Granny&rsquo;s plate. &ldquo;How about you?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Two helpings,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;With <span class="italic">extra</span> sauce, Gytha Ogg, may you be forgiven.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny looked at her with something like admiration in her eyes. &ldquo;You ain&rsquo;t even sweating!&rdquo; she said.<a id="page229"></a></p>


<p class="para">Granny picked up her water glass and held it at arm&rsquo;s length.</p>

<p class="para">After a few seconds, the water began to boil.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right, you&rsquo;re getting really good, I&rsquo;ve got to admit it,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;I reckon I should have to get up real early to put one over on you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I reckon you should never go to sleep,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry, Esme.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Se&ntilde;or Basilica, at a loss to follow the conversation, realized with reluctance that the meal was probably over.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Absolutely superb,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I just <span class="italic">loved</span> that pudding, Mrs. Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I should just jolly well expect you did, Henry Slugg,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Henry carefully removed a clean handkerchief from his pocket, put it over his face, and leaned back in his chair. The first snore occurred a few seconds later.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s easy to have around, isn&rsquo;t he?&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Eat, sleep and sing. You certainly know where you are with him. I&rsquo;ve found Greebo, by the way. He&rsquo;s still following Walter Plinge around.&rdquo; Her expression became a little defiant. &ldquo;Say what you like, young Walter&rsquo;s all right by me if Greebo likes him.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny sighed. &ldquo;Gytha, Greebo would like Norris the Eyeball-Eating Maniac of Quirm if he knew how to put food in a bowl.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">And now she was lost. She&rsquo;d done her best not to be. As Agnes had walked through each dank room she&rsquo;d thoughtfully taken note of details. She&rsquo;d care<a id="page230"></a>fully remembered right and left turns. And yet she was lost.</p>

<p class="para">Here and there were steps down to lower cellars, but the water-level was so high that it was lapping at the first step. And it stank. The candle burned with a greenish-blue edge to the flame.</p>

<p class="para">Somewhere, said Perdita, there <span class="italic">was</span> the secret room. If there wasn&rsquo;t a huge and glittering secret cavern, what on earth was life for? There <span class="italic">had</span> to be a secret room. A room, full of&hellip;giant candles, and enormous stalagmites&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">But it certainly isn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">here</span>, said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">She felt a complete idiot. She&rsquo;d gone through the mirror looking for&hellip;well, she wasn&rsquo;t quite prepared to admit what she might have been looking for, but whatever it was it certainly wasn&rsquo;t this.</p>

<p class="para">She&rsquo;d have to shout for help.</p>

<p class="para">Of course, someone might <span class="italic">hear</span>, but that was always a risk when you shouted for help.</p>

<p class="para">She coughed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;hello?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The water gurgled.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;help? Is there anyone there?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A rat ran over her foot.</p>

<p class="para">Oh, <span class="italic">yes</span>, she thought bitterly with Perdita&rsquo;s part of her brain, if <span class="italic">Christine</span> had come down here there probably <span class="italic">would</span> have been some great glistening cave and delicious danger. The world saved up rats and smelly cellars for Agnes, because she had such a wonderful personality.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Um&hellip;anyone?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">More rats scuttled across the floor. There was a faint squeaking from the side passages.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hello?&rdquo;<a id="page231"></a></p>


<p class="para">She was lost in some cellars with a candle getting shorter by the second. The air was foul, the flagstones were slippery, no one knew where she was, she could die down here, she could be&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">Eyes glowed in the darkness.</p>

<p class="para">One was green-yellow, the other pearly white.</p>

<p class="para">A light appeared behind them.</p>

<p class="para">Something was coming along the passageway, casting long shadows.</p>

<p class="para">Rats tumbled over themselves in their panic to get away&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes tried to press herself into the stone.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hello Miss Perdita X Nitt!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A familiar shape juddered out of the darkness, just behind Greebo. It was all knees and elbows; it carried a sack over one shoulder and held a lantern in its other hand. Something fled from the darkness. The terror leached out of it&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t want to be down here Miss Nitt with all the rats!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Got to do Mister Pounder&rsquo;s job now the poor man is passed away! I am a person of all jobs! No peas for the wicked! But Mister Greebo just hits them with his paws and they&rsquo;re off to rat heaven in a jiff!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter!&rdquo; repeated Agnes, out of sheer relief.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Come for an explore have you? These ole tunnels goes all the way to the river! You have to keep your wits about you not to get lost down here! Want to come back with me?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">It was impossible to be frightened of Walter Plinge. Walter attracted a number of emotions, but terror wasn&rsquo;t among them.<a id="page232"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;yes,&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;I got lost. Sorry.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo sat down and started to wash himself in what Agnes considered to be a supercilious way. If a cat could snigger, he would be sniggering.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Now I&rsquo;ve got a full sack I have to take it to Mister Gimlet&rsquo;s shop!&rdquo; announced Walter, turning around and loping out of the cellar without bothering to see if she was following him. &ldquo;We get a ha&rsquo;penny each which is not to be sneezed at! The dwarfs think a rat is a good meal which only goes to show it would be a strange world if we were all alike!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">It seemed a ridiculously short journey to the foot of some different stairs, which had a well-used look to them.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Have you ever seen the Ghost, Walter?&rdquo; said Agnes, as Walter put his foot on the first step.</p>

<p class="para">He didn&rsquo;t turn around. &ldquo;It is wrong to tell lies!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;yes, so I believe. So&hellip;when did you last see the Ghost?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I last saw the Ghost in the big room in the ballet school!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really? What did he do?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter paused for a moment, and then the words came out all together. &ldquo;He ran off!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He stamped up the stairs in a way that suggested very emphatically that the exchange was over.</p>

<p class="para">Greebo sneered at Agnes and followed him.</p>

<p class="para">The stairs went up just one flight and came out through a trapdoor backstage. She had been lost only a door or two from the real world.</p>

<p class="para">No one noticed her emerge. But then no one noticed her at all. They just assumed that she&rsquo;d be around when she was needed.<a id="page233"></a></p>


<p class="para">Walter Plinge had already loped off, in something of a hurry.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes hesitated. They probably wouldn&rsquo;t even notice she wasn&rsquo;t there, right up to the point when Christine opened her mouth&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">He hadn&rsquo;t wanted to answer, but Walter Plinge spoke when spoken to and she had a feeling that he wasn&rsquo;t able to lie. Telling lies would be being bad.</p>

<p class="para">She&rsquo;d never seen the ballet school. It wasn&rsquo;t far backstage, but it was a world of its own. The dancers issued from it every day like so many very thin and twittering sheep under the control of elderly women who looked as though they breakfasted on pickled limes. It was only after she&rsquo;d timidly asked a few questions of the stagehands that she&rsquo;d realized that the girls had joined the ballet because they <span class="italic">wanted</span> to.</p>

<p class="para">She <span class="italic">had</span> seen the dancers&rsquo; dressing room, where thirty girls washed and changed in a space rather smaller than Bucket&rsquo;s office. It bore the same relationship to ballet as compost did to roses.</p>

<p class="para">She looked around again. Still no one had paid any attention to her.</p>

<p class="para">She headed for the school. It was up a few steps, along a fetid corridor lined with notice boards and smelling of ancient grease. A couple of girls fluttered past. You never saw just one: they went around in groups, like mayflies. She pushed open the door and stepped into the school.</p>

<p class="para">Reflections of reflections of reflections&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">There were mirrors on every wall.</p>

<p class="para">A few girls, practicing on the bars that lined the room, looked up as she entered.</p>

<p class="para">Mirrors&hellip;<a id="page234"></a></p>


<p class="para">Out in the passage she leaned against the wall and got her breath back. She&rsquo;d <span class="italic">never</span> liked mirrors. They always seemed to be laughing at her. But didn&rsquo;t they say it was the mark of a witch, not liking to get between two mirrors? It sucked out your soul, or something. A witch would never get between two mirrors if she could help it&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">But, of course, she <span class="italic">very definitely</span> wasn&rsquo;t a witch. So she took a deep breath, and went back into the room.</p>

<p class="para">Images of herself stretched away in every direction.</p>

<p class="para">She managed a few steps, then wheeled around and groped for the doorway again, watched by the surprised dancers.</p>

<p class="para">Lack of sleep, she told herself. And general over-excitement. Anyway, she didn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">need</span> to go right into the room, now that she knew who the Ghost was.</p>

<p class="para">It was so <span class="italic">obvious</span>. The Ghost didn&rsquo;t require any mysterious nonexistent caves when all he needed to do was hide where everyone could see him.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Mr. Bucket knocked at the door of Salzella&rsquo;s office. A muffled voice said, &ldquo;Come in.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was no one in the office, but there was another closed door in the far wall. Bucket knocked again, and then rattled the door handle.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m in the bath,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Are you decent?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m fully clothed, if that&rsquo;s what you mean. Is there a pail of ice out there?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Was it you who ordered it?&rdquo; said Bucket guiltily.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes!&rdquo;<a id="page235"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Only I, er, I had it taken to my office so I could stick my feet in it&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Your <span class="italic">feet</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. Er&hellip;I went for a brisk run around the city, don&rsquo;t know why, just felt like it&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;My boots caught fire on the second lap.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a sloshing noise and some sotto voce grumbling and then the door swung open, revealing Salzella in a purple dressing gown.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Has Se&ntilde;or Basilica been safely tethered?&rdquo; he said, dripping on the floor.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s going through the music with Herr Trubelmacher.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And he&rsquo;s&hellip;all right?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He sent along to the kitchen for a snack.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella shook his head. &ldquo;Astonishing.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And they&rsquo;ve put the interpreter in a cupboard. They don&rsquo;t seem to be able to get him unfolded.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket sat down carefully. He was wearing carpet slippers.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And&mdash;&rdquo; Salzella prompted.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And what?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where did that <span class="italic">dreadful</span> woman go?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mrs. Ogg is showing her around. Well, what else could I do? Two thousand dollars, remember!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I am endeavoring to forget,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;I promise never to talk about that lunch ever again, if you don&rsquo;t either.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What lunch?&rdquo; said Bucket innocently.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well done.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She does seem to have an amazing effect though, doesn&rsquo;t she&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know who you are talking about.&rdquo;<a id="page236"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean, it&rsquo;s not hard to see how she made her money&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good heavens, man, she&rsquo;s got a face like a hatchet!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They say that Queen Ezeriel of Klatch had a squint, but that didn&rsquo;t stop her having fourteen husbands, and that was only the official score. Besides, she&rsquo;s knocking on a bit&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought she&rsquo;d been dead for two hundred years!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m talking about Lady Esmerelda.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So am I.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;At least try to be civil to her at the soir&eacute;e before the performance tonight.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll try.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The two thousand might be only the start, I hope. Every time I open a drawer there are more bills! We seem to owe money to everyone!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Opera <span class="italic">is</span> expensive.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re telling me. Whenever I try to make a start on the books, something dreadful happens. Do you think I might just have a few hours without something awful happening?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In an opera house?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The voice was muffled by the half-dismantled mechanism of the organ.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right&mdash;give me middle C.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A hairy finger pressed a key. It made a thudding noise and somewhere in the mechanism something else went <span class="italic">woing</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Blast, it&rsquo;s come off the peg&hellip;hold on&hellip;try again&hellip;&rdquo;<a id="page237"></a></p>


<p class="para">The note rang out sweet and clear.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;O-<span class="italic">kay</span>,&rdquo; said the voice of the man hidden in the exposed entrails of the organ. &ldquo;Wait until I tighten the peg&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes stepped closer. The hulking figure seated at the organ turned around and gave her a friendly grin, which was much wider than the average grin. Its owner was covered in red hair and, while short-changed in the leg department, had obviously been first in the queue when the arm counter opened. And had also been given a special free offer of lip.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Andr&eacute;?&rdquo; said Agnes weakly.</p>

<p class="para">The organist extracted himself from the mechanism. He was holding a complicated wooden bar with springs on it. &ldquo;Oh, hello,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;who is this?&rdquo; said Agnes, backing away from the primeval organist.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, this is the Librarian. I don&rsquo;t think he <span class="italic">has</span> a name. He&rsquo;s the Librarian at Unseen University but, much more importantly, he&rsquo;s their organist and it turns out our organ is a Johnson,<span class="footnoteRef"><a href="footnote.xhtml#ft8" id="ft_8">*</a></span> just like theirs. He&rsquo;s given us some spare parts&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Ook</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry, <span class="italic">lent</span> us some spare parts.&rdquo;<a id="page238"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;He plays the organ?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In an amazingly prehensile way, yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes relaxed. The creature didn&rsquo;t seem about to attack.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Well&hellip;I suppose it&rsquo;s natural, because sometimes barrel-organ men came to our village and they often had a dear little mon&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a crashing chord. The orangutan raised its other hand and waved a finger politely in front of Agnes&rsquo;s face.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He doesn&rsquo;t like being called a monkey,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;And he likes you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How can you tell?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He doesn&rsquo;t usually go in for warnings.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She stepped back quickly and grabbed the boy&rsquo;s arm. &ldquo;Can I have a word with you?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got only a few hours and I&rsquo;d really like to get this&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s <span class="italic">important</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He followed her into the wings. Behind them, the Librarian tapped a few keys on the half-repaired keyboard and then ducked underneath.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I know who the Ghost is,&rdquo; whispered Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; stared at her. Then he pulled her farther into the shadows. &ldquo;The Ghost isn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">anybody</span>,&rdquo; he said softly. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be silly. It&rsquo;s just the Ghost.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean he&rsquo;s someone else when he takes his mask off.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Should I tell Mr. Bucket and Mr. Salzella?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Who?</span> Tell them about <span class="italic">who</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter Plinge.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He stared at her again.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;If you laugh I&rsquo;ll&hellip;I&rsquo;ll kick you,&rdquo; said Agnes.<a id="page239"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;But Walter isn&rsquo;t even&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t believe it either but he said he saw the Ghost in the ballet school and there&rsquo;s mirrors all over the walls and he&rsquo;d be quite tall if he stood up properly and he roams around in the cellars&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, come <span class="italic">on&hellip;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The other night I thought I heard him singing on the stage when everyone else had gone.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You saw him?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It was dark.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, well&hellip;&rdquo; Andr&eacute; began dismissively.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But afterward I&rsquo;m <span class="italic">certain</span> I heard him talking to the cat. Talking normally, I mean. I mean like a normal person, I mean. And you&rsquo;ve got to admit&hellip;he is strange. Isn&rsquo;t he just the sort of person who&rsquo;d want to wear a mask to hide who he is?&rdquo; She sagged. &ldquo;Look, I can see you don&rsquo;t want to listen&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No! No, I think&hellip;well&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I just thought I&rsquo;d feel better if I told someone.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; smiled in the gloom. &ldquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t mention it to anyone else, though.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes looked down at her feet. &ldquo;I suppose it does sound a bit far-fetched&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; laid a hand on her arm. Perdita felt Agnes draw herself back. &ldquo;<span class="italic">Do</span> you feel better?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&hellip;don&rsquo;t know&hellip;I mean&hellip;I don&rsquo;t know&hellip;I mean, I just can&rsquo;t imagine him hurting anyone&hellip;I feel so stupid&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Everyone&rsquo;s on edge. Don&rsquo;t worry about it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;d&hellip;hate you to think I was being silly&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll keep an eye on Walter, if you like.&rdquo; He smiled at her. &ldquo;But I&rsquo;d better get on with things,&rdquo; he added. He gave her another smile, as fast and brief as summer lightning.<a id="page240"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Thank y&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He was already walking back to the organ.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">This shop was a gentlemen&rsquo;s outfitters.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not for me,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s for a friend. He&rsquo;s six foot tall, very broad shoulders.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Inside leg?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She looked around the store. Might as well go all the way. It was her money, after all.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And a black coat, long black tights, shoes with them shiny buckles, one of those top hats, a big cloak with a red silk lining, a bow tie, a really posh black cane with a very nobby silver knob on it&hellip;and&hellip;a black eye patch.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;An eye patch?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. Maybe with sequins or something on it, since it&rsquo;s the opera.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The tailor stared at Nanny. &ldquo;This is a little irregular,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Why can&rsquo;t the gentleman come in himself?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He ain&rsquo;t quite a gentleman yet.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But, madam, I meant that we have to get the size right.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg looked around the shop. &ldquo;Tell you what,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;you sell me something that looks about right and we&rsquo;ll adjust him to fit. &rsquo;Scuse me&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She turned away demurely&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;twingtwangtwong&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;and turned back, smoothing down her dress and holding a leather bag.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How much&rsquo;ll it be?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">The tailor looked blankly at the bag. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid  <a id="page241"></a>we won&rsquo;t be able to have all that ready until at least next Wednesday,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg sighed. She felt she was becoming familiar with one of the most fundamental laws of physics. Time equaled money. Therefore, money equaled time.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I was sort of hoping to get it all a bit quicker than that,&rdquo; she said, jingling the bag up and down.</p>

<p class="para">The tailor looked down his nose at her. &ldquo;We are craftsmen, madam. How long did you think it should take?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How about ten minutes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Twelve minutes later she left the shop with a large packet under one arm, a hat box under the other, and an ebony cane between her teeth.</p>

<p class="para">Granny was waiting outside. &ldquo;Got it all?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ess.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll take the eye patch, shall I?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got to get a third witch,&rdquo; said Nanny, trying to rearrange the parcels. &ldquo;Young Agnes has got good strong arms.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You know if we was to drag her out of there by the scruff of her neck we&rsquo;d never hear the last of it,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;She&rsquo;ll be a witch when she wants to be.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">They headed for the Opera House&rsquo;s stage door.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Afternoon, Les,&rdquo; said Nanny cheerfully as they entered. &ldquo;Stopped itching now, has it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Marvelous bit of ointment that was you gave me, Mrs. Ogg,&rdquo; said the stage doorkeeper, his mustache bending into something that might have been a smile.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mrs. Les keeping well? How&rsquo;s her sister&rsquo;s leg?&rdquo;<a id="page242"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Doing very well, Mrs. Ogg, thank you for asking.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is just Esme Weatherwax who&rsquo;s helping me with some stuff,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">The doorkeeper nodded. It was clear that any friend of Mrs. Ogg was a friend of his. &ldquo;No trouble at all, Mrs. Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">As they passed through into the dusty network of corridors Granny reflected, not for the first time, that Nanny had a magic all of her own.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny didn&rsquo;t so much enter places as insinuate herself; she had unconsciously taken a natural talent for liking people and developed it into an occult science. Granny Weatherwax did not doubt that her friend already knew the names, family histories, birthdays and favorite topics of conversation of half the people here, and probably also the vital wedge that would cause them to open up. It might be talking about their children, or a potion for their bad feet, or one of Nanny&rsquo;s really filthy stories, but Nanny would be <span class="italic">in</span> and after twenty-four hours they&rsquo;d have known her all their lives. And they&rsquo;d tell her things. <span class="italic">Of their own free will</span>. Nanny Got On with people. Nanny could get a statue to cry on her shoulder and say what it really thought about pigeons.</p>

<p class="para">It was a knack. Granny had never had the patience to acquire it. Just occasionally, she wondered whether it might have been a good idea.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Curtain up in an hour and a half,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;I promised Giselle I&rsquo;d give her a hand&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who&rsquo;s Giselle?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She does makeup.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t know how to do makeup!&rdquo;<a id="page243"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;I distempered our privy, didn&rsquo;t I?&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;And I paint faces on eggs for the kiddies every Soul Cake Tuesday.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Got to do anything else, have you?&rdquo; said Granny sarcastically. &ldquo;Open the curtains? Fill in for a ballet dancer who&rsquo;s been taken poorly?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I did say I&rsquo;d help with the drinks at the swarray,&rdquo; said Nanny, letting the irony slide off like water on a red-hot stove. &ldquo;Well, a lot of the staff have buggered off &rsquo;cos of the Ghost. It&rsquo;s in the big foyer in half an hour. I expect you ought to be there, being a patronizer.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;s a swarray?&rdquo; said Granny suspiciously.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a sort of posh party before the opera.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do I have to do?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Drink sherry and make polite conversation,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Or conversation, anyway. I saw the grub being done for it. They&rsquo;ve even got little cubes of cheese on sticks stuck in a grapefruit, and you don&rsquo;t get much posher than that.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Gytha Ogg, you ain&rsquo;t done any&hellip;<span class="italic">special</span> dishes, have you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, Esme,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg meekly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Only you&rsquo;ve got an imp of mischief in you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Been far too busy for anything like that,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Granny nodded. &ldquo;Then we&rsquo;d better find Greebo,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You sure about this, Esme?&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We might have a lot to do tonight,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Maybe we could do with an extra pair of hands.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Paws.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;At the moment, yes.&rdquo;<a id="page244"></a></p>


<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">It <span class="italic">was</span> Walter. Agnes knew it. It wasn&rsquo;t knowledge in her mind, exactly. It was practically something she breathed. She felt it as a tree feels the sun.</p>

<p class="para">It all fitted. He could go anywhere, and no one took any notice of Walter Plinge. In a way he was invisible, because he was always there. And, if you were someone like Walter Plinge, wouldn&rsquo;t you long to be someone as debonair and dashing as the Ghost?</p>

<p class="para">If you were someone like Agnes Nitt, wouldn&rsquo;t you long to be someone as dark and mysterious as Perdita X Dream?</p>

<p class="para">The traitor thought was there before she could choke it off. She added hurriedly: But I&rsquo;ve never killed anyone.</p>

<p class="para">Because that&rsquo;s what I&rsquo;d have to believe, isn&rsquo;t it? If he&rsquo;s the Ghost, then he&rsquo;s killed people.</p>

<p class="para">All the same&hellip;he does look odd, and he talks as if the words are trying to escape&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">A hand touched her shoulder. She spun round.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s only me!&rdquo; said Christine.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;Oh.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you think this is a <span class="italic">marvelous</span> dress!?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This dress, silly!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes looked her up and down. &ldquo;Oh. Yes. Very nice,&rdquo; she said, disinterest lying on her voice like rain on a midnight pavement.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t sound very impressed!! Really, Perdita, there&rsquo;s no need to be <span class="italic">jealous</span>!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not jealous, I was thinking&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She&rsquo;d only seen the Ghost for a moment, but he <a id="page245"></a>certainly hadn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">moved</span> like Walter. Walter walked as though his body were being dragged along by his head. But the certainty was as hard as marble now.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, you don&rsquo;t seem very impressed, I must say!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m wondering if Walter Plinge is the Ghost,&rdquo; said Agnes, and immediately cursed herself, or at least pooted. She felt embarrassed enough about Andr&eacute;&rsquo;s reaction.</p>

<p class="para">Christine&rsquo;s eyes widened. &ldquo;But he&rsquo;s a clown!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He walks odd and he talks odd,&rdquo; said Agnes, &ldquo;but if he stood up straight&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Christine laughed. Agnes felt herself getting angry. &ldquo;And he practically <span class="italic">told</span> me he was!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You believed him, did you?!&rdquo; Christine made a little tutting sound that Agnes considered quite offensive. &ldquo;Really, you girls believe the strangest things!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do you mean, <span class="italic">we</span> girls?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, <span class="italic">you</span> know! The dancers are always saying they&rsquo;ve seen the Ghost all over the place&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good grief! Do you think I&rsquo;m some sort of impressionable idiot? <span class="italic">Think</span> for a minute before answering!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, of course I don&rsquo;t, but&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Huh!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes strode off into the wings, concerned more with effect than direction. The background noise of the stage faded behind her as she stepped into the scenery store. It didn&rsquo;t lead anywhere except to a pair of big double doors opening to the world outside. It was full of bits of castles, balconies and romantic prison cells, stacked any old how.<a id="page246"></a></p>


<p class="para">Christine hurried up behind her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I really didn&rsquo;t mean&hellip;look, not <span class="italic">Walter&hellip;</span> he&rsquo;s just a very odd odd-job man!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He does all kinds of jobs! No one ever knows where he is&mdash;they all just assume he&rsquo;s around!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right, but you don&rsquo;t have to get so worked up&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was the faintest of sounds behind them.</p>

<p class="para">They turned.</p>

<p class="para">The Ghost bowed.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;Who&rsquo;s a good boy, then? Nanny&rsquo;s got a bowl of fish eggs for a good boy,&rdquo; said Nanny, trying to see under the big dresser in the kitchen.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Fish eggs?&rdquo; said Granny, coldly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I borrowed them from the stuff they&rsquo;ve done for the swarray,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Borrowed?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s right. Come along, Greebo, who&rsquo;s a good boy then?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Borrowed. You mean&hellip;when the cat&rsquo;s finished with them, you&rsquo;re going to give them back?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s only a manner of speaking, Esme,&rdquo; said Nanny in a hurt little voice. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not the same as stealing if you don&rsquo;t <span class="italic">mean</span> it. Come along, boy, here&rsquo;s some lovely fish eggs for you&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo pulled himself farther into the shadows.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">There was a little sigh from Christine and she folded up into a faint. But she managed, Agnes noticed sourly, to collapse in a way that probably didn&rsquo;t hurt when she hit the ground and which <a id="page247"></a>showed off her dress to the best effect. It was beginning to dawn on Agnes that Christine was remarkably clever in some specialized ways.</p>

<p class="para">She looked back at the mask.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s all right,&rdquo; she said, her voice sounding hoarse even to her. &ldquo;I know why you&rsquo;re doing it. I really do.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">No expression could cross that ivory face, but the eyes flickered.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes swallowed. The Perdita part of her wanted to give in right now, because that would be more exciting, but she stood her ground.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You want to be something else and you&rsquo;re stuck with what you are,&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;I know all about that. <span class="italic">You&rsquo;re</span> lucky. All <span class="italic">you</span> have to do is put on a mask. At least you&rsquo;re the right shape. But why did you have to go and kill people? Why? Mr. Pounder couldn&rsquo;t have done you any harm! But&hellip;he poked around in odd places, didn&rsquo;t he, and he&hellip;found something?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The Ghost nodded slightly, and then held out his ebony cane. He grasped both ends and pulled, so that a long thin sword slid out.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I know who you are!&rdquo; Agnes burst out, as he stepped forward. &ldquo;I&hellip;I could probably help you! It might not have been your fault!&rdquo; She backed away. &ldquo;<span class="italic">I</span> haven&rsquo;t done anything to you! You don&rsquo;t have to be afraid of me!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She backed away farther as the figure advanced. The eyes, in the dark hollows of the mask, glinted like tiny jewels.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m your <span class="italic">friend</span>, don&rsquo;t you see? Please, Walter! <span class="italic">Walter!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was, far off, an answering sound that <a id="page248"></a>seemed as loud as thunder and as impossible, in the circumstances, as a chocolate kettle.</p>

<p class="para">It was the clank of a bucket handle.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;s the matter Miss Perdita Nitt?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The Ghost hesitated.</p>

<p class="para">There was the sound of footsteps. Irregular footsteps.</p>

<p class="para">The Ghost lowered the sword, opened a door in a piece of scenery painted to represent a castle wall, bowed ironically and slipped away.</p>

<p class="para">Walter rounded a corner.</p>

<p class="para">He was an unlikely knight errant. For one thing, he had on evening dress obviously designed for someone of a different shape. He was still wearing his beret. He also wore an apron and was carrying a mop and bucket. But no heroic lance-wielding rescuer ever galloped over a drawbridge more happily. He was practically surrounded by a golden glow.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;s the matter with Miss Christine?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&hellip;er&hellip;she fainted,&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;Er. Probably&hellip;yes, probably the excitement. With the opera. Tonight. Yes. Probably. The excitement. Because of the opera tonight.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter gave her a slightly worried look. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he said, and added patiently, &ldquo;I know where there&rsquo;s a medicine box shall I get it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Christine groaned and fluttered her eyelashes. &ldquo;Where am I?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Perdita gritted Agnes&rsquo;s teeth. <span class="italic">Where am I?</span> That didn&rsquo;t sound the sort of thing someone said when they woke up from a faint; it sounded more like the sort of thing they said because they&rsquo;d heard it was the sort of thing people said.<a id="page249"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;You fainted,&rdquo; she said. She looked hard at Walter. &ldquo;Why were you in here, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Got to mop out the stagehands&rsquo; privy Miss Nitt. Always having trouble I&rsquo;ve been working on it for months!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But you&rsquo;re wearing evening dress!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes then I got to be a waiter afterward because we&rsquo;re short-handed and there&rsquo;s no one else to be a waiter when they have drinks and sausages on poles before the opera.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">No one could have moved that fast. True, Walter and the Ghost hadn&rsquo;t both been in the room at the same time, but she&rsquo;d heard his voice. No one could have had time to duck around behind the piles of flats and turn up at the opposite side of the room in seconds, unless they were some sort of wizard. Some of the girls <span class="italic">did</span> say the Ghost could almost seem to be in two places at once. Perhaps there were other secret places like the old staircase. Perhaps he&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">She stopped herself. Walter Plinge wasn&rsquo;t the Ghost, then. There was no sense in trying to find some excitable explanation to prove wrong right.</p>

<p class="para">She&rsquo;d told Christine. Well, Christine was giving her just a slightly bemused look as Walter helped her up. And she&rsquo;d told Andr&eacute;, but he hadn&rsquo;t seemed to believe her so probably that was all right.</p>

<p class="para">Which meant that the Ghost was&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&hellip;someone else.</p>

<p class="para">She&rsquo;d been so <span class="italic">certain</span>.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;You&rsquo;ll enjoy it, mother. You really will.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Tain&rsquo;t for the likes of us, Henry. I don&rsquo;t see <a id="page250"></a>why Mr. Morecombe couldn&rsquo;t give you tickets to see Nellie Stamp at the music hall. Now that&rsquo;s what I call music. Proper tunes you can understand.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Songs like &lsquo;She Sits Among the Cabbages and Leeks&rsquo; are not very cultural, mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Two figures wandered through the crowds heading for the Opera House. This was their conversation.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;S a good laugh, though. And you don&rsquo;t have to hire suits. Seems daft to me, havin&rsquo; to wear a special suit just to listen to music.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It enhances the experience,&rdquo; said young Henry, who had read this somewhere.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean, how does the music know?&rdquo; said his mother. &ldquo;Now, Nellie Stamp&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Come <span class="italic">along</span>, mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">It was going to be one of those evenings, he knew it.</p>

<p class="para">Henry Lawsy did his best. And, given the starting point, it wasn&rsquo;t a bad best. He was a clerk in the firm of Morecombe, Slant &amp; Honeyplace, a somewhat old-fashioned legal partnership. One reason for its less-than-modern approach was the fact that Messrs. Morecombe and Honeyplace were vampires and Mr. Slant was a zombie. The three partners were, therefore, technically dead, although this did not prevent them putting in a proper day&rsquo;s work&mdash;normally during the night, in the case of Mr. Morecombe and Mr. Honeyplace.</p>

<p class="para">From Henry&rsquo;s point of view the hours were good and the job was not onerous, but he chafed somewhat about his promotion prospects because clearly dead men&rsquo;s shoes were being fully occupied by dead men. He&rsquo;d decided that the only way to succeed was <a id="page251"></a>to better himself by Improving His Mind, which he tried to do at every opportunity. It is probably a full description of Henry Lawsy&rsquo;s mind that if you had given him a book called <span class="italic">How to Improve Your Mind in Five Minutes</span>, he would have read it with a stopwatch. His progress through life was hampered by his tremendous sense of his own ignorance, a disability which affects all too few people.</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Morecombe had given him two opera tickets as a reward for sorting out a particularly problematical tort. He&rsquo;d invited his mother because she represented 100 percent of all the women he knew.</p>

<p class="para">People tended to shake Henry&rsquo;s hand cautiously, in case it came off.</p>

<p class="para">He&rsquo;d bought a book about the opera and read it carefully, because he&rsquo;d heard that it was absolutely unheard-of to go to an opera without knowing what it was about, and the chance of finding out while you were actually watching it was remote. The book&rsquo;s reassuring weight was in his pocket right now. All he needed to complete the evening was a less embarrassing parent.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can we get some peanuts before we go in?&rdquo; said his mother.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mother, they don&rsquo;t sell peanuts at the opera.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No peanuts? What&rsquo;re you supposed to do if you don&rsquo;t like the songs?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo&rsquo;s suspicious eyes were two glows in the gloom.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Poke him with a broom handle,&rdquo; suggested Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;With someone like Greebo <a id="page252"></a>you have to use a little bit of kindness.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny closed her eyes and waved a hand.</p>

<p class="para">There was a yowl from under the kitchen&rsquo;s dresser and a sound of frantic scrabbling. Then, his claws scoring tracks in the floor, Greebo came out backward, fighting all the way.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mind you, a lot of cruelty does the trick as well,&rdquo; Nanny conceded. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve never been much of a cat person, have you, Esme?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo would have hissed at Granny, except that even his cat brain was just bright enough to realize this was not the best move he could make.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Give him his fish eggs,&rdquo; Granny said. &ldquo;He might as well have them now as later.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo inspected the dish. Oh, this was all right, then. They wanted to give him food.</p>

<p class="para">Granny nodded at Nanny Ogg. They held out their hands, palm up.</p>

<p class="para">Greebo was halfway through the caviar when he felt It happening.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Wrrroowlllll&mdash;&rdquo; he wailed, and then the voice went deeper as his chest expanded, and rose physically as his back legs lengthened under him.</p>

<p class="para">His ears flattened against his head, and then crept down the sides.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;lllllwwaaaa&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The jacket&rsquo;s a forty-four-inch chest,&rdquo; said Nanny. Granny nodded.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;aaaaoooo&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">His face flattened. His whiskers spread out. Greebo&rsquo;s nose developed a life of its own.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;oooooss&hellip;sshit!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He certainly gets the hang of it quicker these days,&rdquo; said Nanny.<a id="page253"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;You put some clothes on right now, my lad,&rdquo; said Granny, who had shut her eyes.</p>

<p class="para">Not that this made much difference, she had to admit later. Greebo fully clothed still managed to communicate the nakedness beneath. The insouciant mustache, the long sideburns and the tousled black hair combined with the well-developed muscles to give the impression of the more louche kind of buccaneer or a romantic poet who&rsquo;d given up on the opium and tried red meat instead. He had a scar running across his face, and a black patch now where it crossed the eye. When he smiled, he exuded an easy air of undistilled, excitingly dangerous lasciviousness. He could swagger while asleep. Greebo could, in fact, commit sexual harassment simply by sitting very quietly in the next room.</p>

<p class="para">Except as far as the witches were concerned. To Granny a cat was a damn cat whatever shape it was, and Nanny Ogg always thought of him as Mister Fluffy.</p>

<p class="para">She adjusted the bow tie and stood back critically. &ldquo;What do you think?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He looks like an assassin, but he&rsquo;ll do,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, what a nasty thing to say!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo waved his arms experimentally and fumbled with the ebony cane. Fingers took a bit of getting used to, but cat reflexes learned fast.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny waved a finger playfully under his nose. He took a half hearted swipe at it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Now you just stay with Granny and do what she tells you like a good boy,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yess, Nan-ny,&rdquo; said Greebo reluctantly. He managed to grip the stick properly.<a id="page254"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;And no fighting.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, Nan-ny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And no leaving bits of people on the doormat.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, Nan-ny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll have no trouble like we did with those robbers last month.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, Nan-ny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He looked depressed. Humans had no <span class="italic">fun</span>. Incredible complications surrounded the most basic activities.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And no turning back into a cat again until we say.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yess, Nan-ny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Play your cards right and there could be a kipper in this for you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yess, Nan-ny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;re we going to call him?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;He can&rsquo;t just be Greebo, which I&rsquo;ve always said was a damn silly name for a cat.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, he looks aristocratic&mdash;&rdquo; Nanny began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He looks like a beautiful brainless bully,&rdquo; Granny corrected her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Aristocratic,&rdquo; repeated Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Same thing.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We can&rsquo;t call him Greebo, anyway.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll think of something.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Salzella leaned disconsolately against the marble banister of the foyer&rsquo;s grand staircase and stared gloomily into his drink.</p>

<p class="para">It had always seemed to him that one of the major flaws in the whole business of opera was the audience. They were quite unsuitable. The only <a id="page255"></a>ones worse than the ones who didn&rsquo;t know anything at all about music, and whose idea of a sensible observation was &ldquo;I liked that bit near the end when her voice went wobbly,&rdquo; were the ones who thought they did&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Want a drink do you Mister Salzella? There&rsquo;s lots you know!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter Plinge ambled by, his black suit making him look like a very good class of scarecrow.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Plinge, you just say &lsquo;Drink, sir?&rsquo;&rdquo; said the director of music. &ldquo;And please take off that ridiculous beret.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;My mum made it for me!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure she did, but&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket sidled up to him. &ldquo;I thought I told you to keep Se&ntilde;or Basilica away from the canap&eacute;s!&rdquo; he hissed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry, I couldn&rsquo;t find a big enough crowbar,&rdquo; said Salzella, waving away Walter and his beret. &ldquo;Anyway, isn&rsquo;t he supposed to be communing with his muse in his dressing room? The curtain goes up in twenty minutes!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He says he sings better on a full stomach.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then we&rsquo;re in for a big treat tonight.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket turned and surveyed the scene. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s going well, anyway,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I suppose so.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The Watch are here, you know. In secret. They&rsquo;re mingling.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah&hellip;let me guess&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella looked around at the crowds. There was, indeed, a very short man in a suit intended for a rather larger man; this was especially the case with the opera cloak, which actually trailed on the <a id="page256"></a>floor behind him to give the overall impression of a superhero who had spent too much time around the Kryptonite. He was wearing a deformed fur hat and trying surreptitiously to smoke a cigarette.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You mean that little man with the words &lsquo;Watchman in Disguise&rsquo; flashing on and off just above his head?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where? I didn&rsquo;t see that!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella sighed. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s Corporal Nobby Nobbs,&rdquo; he said wearily. &ldquo;The only known person to require an identity card to prove his species. I&rsquo;ve watched him mingle with three large sherries.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s not the only one, though,&rdquo; said Mr. Bucket. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re taking this seriously.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;If we look over there, for example, we see Sergeant Detritus, who is a troll, and who is wearing what in the circumstances is actually a rather well-fitting suit. It is therefore, I feel, something of a pity he has neglected to remove his helmet. And these, you understand, the Watch has chosen for their ability to blend.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, they&rsquo;ll certainly be useful if the Ghost strikes again,&rdquo; said Bucket, hopelessly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The Ghost would have to&mdash;&rdquo; Salzella stopped. He blinked. &ldquo;Oh, good grief,&rdquo; he whispered. &ldquo;What <span class="italic">has</span> she found?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket turned. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s Lady Esmerelda&hellip;oh.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo strolled in alongside her with the gentle swagger that makes women thoughtful and men&rsquo;s knuckles go white. The buzz of conversation was momentarily hushed, and then rose again to a slightly shriller buzz.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m impressed,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He certainly doesn&rsquo;t look like a <span class="italic">gentleman</span>,&rdquo; <a id="page257"></a>said Bucket. &ldquo;Look at the color of that eye!&rdquo; He set his face into what he hoped was a smile, and bowed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Lady Esmerelda!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;How pleasant to see you again! Won&rsquo;t you introduce us to your&hellip;guest?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is Lord Gribeau,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Mr. Bucket, the owner, and Mr. Salzella, who seems to run the place.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Haha,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">Gribeau snarled, revealing longer incisors than any that Bucket had seen outside a zoo. And Bucket had never seen such a greenish-yellow eye. The pupil was all wrong&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ahaha&hellip;&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And may I order you something?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;ll have milk,&rdquo; said Granny firmly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I expect he has to keep up his strength,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">Granny spun around. Her expression would have etched steel.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Anyone for a drink?&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg, appearing out of nowhere with a tray and adroitly stepping between them like a very small peacekeeping force. &ldquo;Got a bit of everything here&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Including a glass of milk, I see,&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella looked from one witch to the other. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s remarkably foresighted of you,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, you never know,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Gribeau took the glass in both hands and lapped at it with his tongue. Then he looked at Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What yourrr lookin aat? Neverrr seein mil&mdash;uk drun beforr?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Never quite&hellip;like that, I must admit.&rdquo;<a id="page258"></a></p>


<p class="para">Nanny winked at Granny Weatherwax as she turned to scurry away.</p>

<p class="para">Granny caught her arm. &ldquo;Remember,&rdquo; she whispered, &ldquo;when we go into the Box&hellip;you keep an eye on Mrs. Plinge. Mrs. Plinge knows something. I ain&rsquo;t sure what&rsquo;s going to happen. But it is going to happen.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Right,&rdquo; said Nanny. She bustled off, muttering under her breath, &ldquo;Oh, yes&hellip;do this, do that&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Drink here, please, ma&rsquo;am.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny looked down. &ldquo;Good grief,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;What are you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The apparition in the fur hat winked at her. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m the Count de Nobbs,&rdquo; it said, &ldquo;and this here,&rdquo; it added, indicating a mobile wall, &ldquo;is the Count de Tritus.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny glanced at the troll. &ldquo;Another Count? I&rsquo;m sure there&rsquo;s unaccountably more Counts here than I can count. And what can I get you, officers?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Officers? Us?&rdquo; said the Count de Nobbs. &ldquo;What makes you think we&rsquo;re Watchmen?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s got a helmet on,&rdquo; Nanny pointed out. &ldquo;Also, he&rsquo;s got his badge pinned to his coat.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I <span class="italic">told</span> you to put it away!&rdquo; Nobby hissed. He looked at Nanny and smiled uneasily. &ldquo;Milit&rsquo;ry chic,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s just a fashion accessory. Actually, we are gentlemen of means and have nothing to do with the city Watch whatsoever.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, <span class="italic">gentlemen</span>, would you like some wine?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not while we on duty, t&rsquo;anks,&rdquo; said the troll.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes, thank you very much, Count de Tritus,&rdquo; said Nobby bitterly. &ldquo;Oh, yes, very undercover, that is! Why don&rsquo;t you just wave your trun<a id="page259"></a>cheon around where everyone can see it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, if you t&rsquo;ink it&rsquo;d help&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Put it <span class="italic">away</span>!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The Count de Tritus&rsquo;s eyebrows met with the effort of thought. &ldquo;Dat was irony, den, was it? To a superior officer?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can&rsquo;t be a superior officer, can you, &rsquo;cos we ain&rsquo;t Watchmen. Look, Commander Vimes <span class="italic">explained</span> it three times&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg tactfully moved away. It was bad enough watching them blow their cover without sucking at it as well.</p>

<p class="para">This was a new world, all right. She was used to a life where the men wore the bright clothes and the women wore black. It made it a lot easier to decide what to put on in the mornings. But inside the Opera House the rules of clothing were all in reverse, just like the laws of common sense. Here the women dressed like frosted peacocks and the men looked like penguins.</p>

<p class="para">So&hellip;there were coppers here. Nanny Ogg was basically a law-abiding person when she had no reason to break the law, and therefore had that kind of person&rsquo;s attitude to law-enforcement officers, which was one of deep and permanent distrust.</p>

<p class="para">There was their approach to theft, for example. Nanny had a witch&rsquo;s view of theft, which was a lot more complicated than the attitude adopted by the law and, if it came to it, people who owned property worth stealing. They tended to wield the huge blunt ax of the law in circumstances that required the delicate scalpel of common sense.</p>

<p class="para">No, thought Nanny. Policemen with their great big boots were not required here on a night like <a id="page260"></a>this. It would be a good idea to put a thumbtack under the ponderous feet of Justice.</p>

<p class="para">She ducked behind a gilt statue and fumbled in the recesses of her clothing while people nearby looked around in puzzlement at the erratic twanging of elastic. She was sure she had one around somewhere&mdash;she&rsquo;d packed it in case of emergencies&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">There was the clink of a small bottle. Ah, yes.</p>

<p class="para">A moment later Nanny Ogg emerged decorously with two small glasses on her tray, and headed purposefully for the Watchmen.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Fruit drink, officers?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Oh, silly me, what am I saying, I didn&rsquo;t mean officers. Homemade fruit drink?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Detritus sniffed suspiciously, immediately clearing his sinuses. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s in it?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Apples,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg promptly. &ldquo;Well&hellip;mainly apples.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Under her hand, a couple of spilt drops finished eating their way through the metal of the tray and dropped onto the carpet, where they smoked.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The auditorium buzzed with the sound of operagoers settling down and Mrs. Lawsy trying to find her shoes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You really shouldn&rsquo;t have taken them off, mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;My feet are giving me gyp.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Did you bring your knitting?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think I must&rsquo;ve left it in the Ladies.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, <span class="italic">mother</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Henry Lawsy marked his place in his book and raised his runny eyes heavenward, and blinked. <a id="page261"></a>Right above him&mdash;a long way above him&mdash;was a glittering circle of light.</p>

<p class="para">His mother followed his gaze. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s that, then?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s a chandelier, mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a pretty big one. What&rsquo;s holding it up?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure they&rsquo;ve got special ropes and things, mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Looks a bit dangerous, to my mind.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure it&rsquo;s absolutely safe, mother.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do you know about chandeliers?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure people wouldn&rsquo;t come into the Opera House if there was any chance of a chandelier dropping on their heads, mother,&rdquo; said Henry, trying to read his book.</p>

<div class="extract">

<p class="extractTextNoIndent"><span class="italic">Il Truccatore, The Master of Disguise</span>. Il Truccatore (ten.), a mysterious nobleman, causes scandal in the city when he woos high-born ladies while disguised as their husbands. However, Laura (sop.), the new bride of Capriccio (bar.), refuses to give in to his blandishments&mdash;</p>
</div>

<p class="para">Henry put a bookmark in the book, took a smaller book from his pocket, and carefully looked up &ldquo;blandishments.&rdquo; He was moving in a world he wasn&rsquo;t quite sure of; embarrassment lay waiting at every turn, and he wasn&rsquo;t going to get caught out over a word. Henry lived his life in permanent dread of Being Asked Questions Later.</p>

<div class="extract">

<p class="extractTextNoIndent">&mdash;and with the help of his servant Wingie (ten.) he adopts a subterfuge&mdash;</p>
</div>

<p class="para">The dictionary came out again for a moment.<a id="page262"></a></p>


<div class="extract">

<p class="extractTextNoIndent">&mdash;culminating&mdash;</p>
</div>

<p class="para">And again.</p>

<div class="extract">

<p class="extractTextNoIndent">&mdash;in the scene at the famous Masked Ball at the Duke&rsquo;s Palace. But Il Truccatore has not reckoned with his old adversary the Count de&mdash;</p>
</div>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Adversary&rdquo;&hellip;Henry sighed, and reached for his pocket.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Curtain up in five minutes&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella reviewed his troops. They consisted of scene builders and painters and all those other employees who could be spared for the evening. At the end of the line, about fifty percent of Walter Plinge had managed to stand to attention.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Now, you all know your positions,&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;And if you see anything, anything at all, you are to let me know at once. Do you understand?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Salzella!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We mustn&rsquo;t interrupt the opera Mr. Salzella!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella shook his head. &ldquo;People will understand, I&rsquo;m sure&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Show must go on Mr. Salzella!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter, you will do what you&rsquo;re told!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Someone raised a hand. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s got a point, though, Mr. Salzella&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella rolled his eyes. &ldquo;Just catch the Ghost,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If we can do it without a lot of shouting, <a id="page263"></a>that&rsquo;s good. Of course I don&rsquo;t want to stop the show.&rdquo; He saw them relax.</p>

<p class="para">A deep chord rolled out over the stage.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What the hell was that?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella strode behind the stage and was met by Andr&eacute;, looking excited.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;s going on?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We repaired it, Mr. Salzella! Only&hellip;well, he doesn&rsquo;t want to give up the seat&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The Librarian nodded at the director of music. Salzella knew the orangutan, and among the things he knew was that, if the Librarian wanted to sit somewhere, then that was where he sat. But he was a first-class organist, Salzella had to admit. His lunch-time recitals in the Great Hall of Unseen University were extremely popular, especially since the University&rsquo;s organ had every single sound-effect that Bloody Stupid Johnson&rsquo;s inverted genius had been able to contrive. No one would have believed, before a pair of simian hands had worked on the project, that something like Doinov&rsquo;s romantic <span class="italic">Prelude in G</span> could be rescored for Whoopee Cushion and Squashed Rabbits.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There&rsquo;s the overtures,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;, &ldquo;and the ballroom scene&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;At least get him a bow-tie,&rdquo; said Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No one can see him, Mr. Salzella, and he hasn&rsquo;t really got much of a neck&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We <span class="italic">do</span> have standards, Andr&eacute;.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, Mr. Salzella.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Since you seem to have been relieved of employment this evening, then perhaps you could help us apprehend the Ghost.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Certainly, Mr. Salzella.&rdquo;<a id="page264"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Fetch him a tie, then, and come with me.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A little later, left to himself, the Librarian opened his copy of the score and placed it carefully on the stand.</p>

<p class="para">He reached down under the seat and pulled out a large brown paper bag of peanuts. He wasn&rsquo;t entirely sure why Andr&eacute;, having talked him into playing the organ this evening, had told the other man that it was because he, the Librarian, wouldn&rsquo;t budge. In fact, he&rsquo;d got some interesting cataloguing to do and had been looking forward to it. Instead, he seemed to be here for the night, although a pound of shelled peanuts <span class="italic">was</span> handsome pay by any ape&rsquo;s standards. The human mind was a deep and abiding mystery and the Librarian was glad he didn&rsquo;t have one anymore.</p>

<p class="para">He inspected the bow tie. As Andr&eacute; had foreseen, it presented certain problems to someone who&rsquo;d been behind the door when the necks were handed out.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Granny Weatherwax stopped in front of Box Eight and looked around. Mrs. Plinge wasn&rsquo;t visible. She unlocked the door with what was probably the most expensive key in the world.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And you behave yourself,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ye-ess, Gran-ny,&rdquo; moaned Greebo.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No going to the lavatory in the corners.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, Gran-ny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny glared at her escort. Even in a bow tie, even with his fine mustaches waxed, he was still a cat. You just couldn&rsquo;t trust them to do anything except turn up for meals.<a id="page265"></a></p>


<p class="para">The inside of the Box was rich red plush, picked out with gilt decoration. It was like a soft little private room.</p>

<p class="para">There were a couple of fat pillars on either side, supporting part of the weight of the balcony above. She looked over the edge and noted the drop to the Stalls below. Of course, someone could probably climb in from one of the adjacent Boxes, but that&rsquo;d be in full view of the audience and would be bound to cause some comment. She peeked under the seats. She stood on a chair and felt around the ceiling, which had gilt stars on it. She inspected the carpet minutely.</p>

<p class="para">She smiled at what she saw. She&rsquo;d been prepared to bet that she knew how the Ghost got in, and now she was certain.</p>

<p class="para">Greebo spat on his hand and tried ineffectually to groom his hair.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You sit quiet and eat your fish eggs,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ye-ess, Gran-ny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And watch the opera, it&rsquo;s good for you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ye-ess, Gran-ny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;Evenin&rsquo;, Mrs. Plinge!&rdquo; said Nanny cheerfully. &ldquo;Ain&rsquo;t this excitin&rsquo;? The buzz of the audience, the air of expectation, the blokes in the orchestra findin&rsquo; somewhere to hide the bottles and tryin&rsquo; to remember how to play&hellip;all the exhilaration an&rsquo; drama of the operatic experience waitin&rsquo; to unfold&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, hello, Mrs. Ogg,&rdquo; said Mrs. Plinge. She was polishing glasses in her tiny bar.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Certainly very packed,&rdquo; said Nanny. She looked <a id="page266"></a>sidelong at the old woman.<span class="footnoteRef"><a href="footnote.xhtml#ft9" id="ft_9">*</a></span> &ldquo;Every seat sold, I heard.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">This didn&rsquo;t achieve the expected reaction.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shall I give you a hand cleaning out Box Eight?&rdquo; she went on.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, I cleaned it out last week,&rdquo; said Mrs. Plinge. She held a glass up to the light.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but I heard her ladyship is very particular,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Very picky about things.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What ladyship?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Bucket has sold Box Eight, see,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">She heard a faint tinkle of glass. <span class="italic">Ah</span>.</p>

<p class="para">Mrs. Plinge appeared at the doorway of her nook. &ldquo;But he can&rsquo;t do that!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s his Opera House,&rdquo; said Nanny, watching Mrs. Plinge carefully. &ldquo;I suppose he thinks he can.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the <span class="italic">Ghost&rsquo;s</span> Box!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Operagoers were appearing along the corridor.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I shouldn&rsquo;t think he&rsquo;d mind just for one night,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg. &ldquo;The show must go on, eh? Are you all right, Mrs. Plinge?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think I&rsquo;d just better go and&mdash;&rdquo; she began, stepping forward.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, you have a good sit down and a rest,&rdquo; said Nanny, pressing her back with gentle but irresistible force.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But I should go and&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">And what</span>, Mrs. Plinge?&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">The old woman went pale. Granny Weatherwax <a id="page267"></a>could be nasty, but then nastiness was always in the window: you were aware that it might turn up on the menu. Sharpness from Nanny Ogg, though, was like being bitten by a big friendly dog. It was all the worse for being unexpected.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I daresay you wanted to go and have a word with somebody, did you, Mrs. Plinge?&rdquo; said Nanny softly. &ldquo;Someone who might be a little shocked to find his Box full, perhaps? I reckon I could put a name to that someone, Mrs. Plinge. Now, if&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The old woman&rsquo;s hand came up holding a bottle of champagne and then came down hard in an effort to launch the SS <span class="italic">Gytha Ogg</span> onto the seas of unconsciousness. The bottle bounced.</p>

<p class="para">Then Mrs. Plinge leapt past and scuttled away, her polished little black boots twinkling.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg caught the door frame and swayed a little while blue and purple fireworks went off behind her eyes. But there was dwarf in the Ogg ancestry, and that meant a skull you could go mining with.</p>

<p class="para">She stared muzzily at the bottle. &ldquo;Year of the Insulted Goat,&rdquo; she mumbled. &ldquo;&rsquo;S a good year.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Then consciousness gained the upper hand.</p>

<p class="para">She grinned as she galloped after the retreating figure. In Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s place she&rsquo;d have done exactly the same thing, except a good deal harder.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Agnes waited with the others for the curtain to go up. She was one of the crowd of fifty or so townspeople who would hear Enrico Basilica sing of his success as a master of disguise, it being a vital part of the entire process that, while the chorus would <a id="page268"></a>listen to expositions of the plot, and even sing along, they would suffer an instant lapse of memory afterward so that later unmaskings would come as a surprise.</p>

<p class="para">For some reason, without any word being spoken, as many people as possible seemed to have acquired very broad-brimmed hats. Those who hadn&rsquo;t were taking every opportunity to glance upward.</p>

<p class="para">Beyond the curtain, Herr Trubelmacher launched the overture.</p>

<p class="para">Enrico, who had been chewing a chicken leg, carefully put the bone on a plate and nodded. The waiting stagehand dashed off.</p>

<p class="para">The opera had begun.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Mrs. Plinge reached the bottom of the grand staircase and hung on to the banister, panting.</p>

<p class="para">The opera had started. There was no one around. And no sounds of pursuit, either.</p>

<p class="para">She straightened up, and tried to get her breath back.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Coo-ee, Mrs. Plinge!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg, waving the champagne bottle like a club, was already traveling at speed when she hit the first turn in the banister, but she leaned like a professional and kept her balance as she went into the straight, and then tilted again for the next curve&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&hellip;which left only the big gilt statue at the bottom. It is the fate of all banisters worth sliding down that there is something nasty waiting at the far end. But Nanny Ogg&rsquo;s response was superb. She <a id="page269"></a>swung a leg over as she hurtled downward and pushed herself off, her nailed boots leaving grooves in the marble as she spun to a halt in front of the old woman.</p>

<p class="para">Mrs. Plinge was lifted off her feet and carried into the shadows behind another statue.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t want to try and outrun me, Mrs. Plinge,&rdquo; Nanny whispered, as she clamped a hand firmly over Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s mouth. &ldquo;You just want to wait here <span class="italic">quietly</span> with me. And don&rsquo;t go thinking I&rsquo;m nice. I&rsquo;m only nice compared to Esme, but so is practic&rsquo;ly everyone&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mmf!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">With one hand tightly around Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s arm and another over her mouth, Nanny peered round the statue. She could hear the singing, far off.</p>

<p class="para">Nothing else happened. After a while, she started to fret. Perhaps he&rsquo;d taken fright. Perhaps Mrs. Plinge had left him some sort of signal. Perhaps he&rsquo;d decided that the world was currently too dangerous for Ghosts, although Nanny doubted he could ever decide that&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">At this rate the first act would be over before&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">A door opened somewhere. A lanky figure in a black suit and a ridiculous beret crossed the foyer and went up the stairs. At the top, they saw it turn in the direction of the Boxes and disappear.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Y&rsquo;see,&rdquo; said Nanny, trying to get the stiffness out of her limbs, &ldquo;the thing about Esme is, she&rsquo;s stupid&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mmf?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;so she thinks that the most obvious way, d&rsquo;y&rsquo;see, for the Ghost to get in and out of the Box is through the door. If you can&rsquo;t find a secret panel, <a id="page270"></a>she reckons, it&rsquo;s because it ain&rsquo;t there. A secret panel that ain&rsquo;t there is the best kind there is, the reason bein&rsquo;, no bugger can find it. That&rsquo;s where you people all think too operatic, see? You&rsquo;re all cooped up in this place, listening to daft plots what don&rsquo;t make sense, and I reckon it does something to your minds. People can&rsquo;t find a trapdoor so they say, oh, deary me, what a hidden trapdoor it must be. Whereas a normal person, e.g., me and Esme, we&rsquo;d say: Maybe there ain&rsquo;t one, then. And the best way for the Ghost to get around the place without being seen is for him to be seen and not noticed. Especially if he&rsquo;s got keys. People don&rsquo;t notice Walter. They looks the other way.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She gently released her grip. &ldquo;Now, I don&rsquo;t blame you, Mrs. Plinge, &rsquo;cos I&rsquo;d do the same for one of mine, but you&rsquo;d have done better to trust Esme right at the start. She&rsquo;ll help you if she can.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny let Mrs. Plinge go, but kept a grip on the champagne bottle, just in case.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What if she can&rsquo;t?&rdquo; said Mrs. Plinge bitterly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You think Walter did those murders?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s a good boy!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure that&rsquo;s the same as a &lsquo;no,&rsquo; isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They&rsquo;ll put him in prison!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;If he done them murders, Esme won&rsquo;t let that happen,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Something sank into Mrs. Plinge&rsquo;s not very alert mind. &ldquo;What do you mean, she won&rsquo;t let that happen?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean,&rdquo; said Nanny, &ldquo;that if you throw yourself on Esme&rsquo;s mercy, you better be damn sure you deserve to bounce.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;<a id="page271"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Now, don&rsquo;t you worry about anything,&rdquo; said Nanny, perhaps a little late under the circumstances. It occurred to her that the immediate future might be a little bit easier on everyone if Mrs. Plinge got some well-earned rest. She fumbled in her clothing and produced a bottle, half-full of some cloudy orange liquid. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll just give you a sip of a little something to calm your nerves&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a sort of tonic,&rdquo; said Nanny. She flicked the cork out with her thumb; on the ceiling above her, the paint crinkled. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s made from apples. Well&hellip;mainly apples&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Walter Plinge stopped outside Box Eight and looked around.</p>

<p class="para">Then he removed his beret and pulled out the mask. The beret went into his pocket.</p>

<p class="para">He straightened up, and it looked very much as though Walter Plinge with the mask on was several inches taller.</p>

<p class="para">He took a key from his pocket and unlocked the door, and the figure that stepped into the Box did not move like Walter Plinge. It moved as though every nerve and muscle were under full and athletic control.</p>

<p class="para">The sounds of the opera filled the Box. The walls had been lined with red velvet and were hung with curtains. The chairs were high and well padded.</p>

<p class="para">The Ghost slipped into one of them and settled down.</p>

<p class="para">A figure leaned forward out of the other chair and said, &ldquo;You carrn&rsquo;t havve my fisssh eggs!&rdquo;<a id="page272"></a></p>


<p class="para">The Ghost leapt up. The door clicked behind him.</p>

<p class="para">Granny stepped out from the curtains.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, well, we meet again,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">He backed away to the edge of the Box.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I shouldn&rsquo;t think you could jump,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a long way down.&rdquo; She focused her best stare on the white mask. &ldquo;And now, Mister Ghost&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He sprang back onto the edge of the Box, saluted Granny flamboyantly, and leapt upward.</p>

<p class="para">Granny blinked.</p>

<p class="para">Up until now the Stare had always worked&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Too damn <span class="italic">dark</span>,&rdquo; she muttered. &ldquo;Greebo!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The bowl of caviar flew out of his nervous fingers and caused a Fortean experience somewhere in the Stalls.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yess, Gran-ny!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Catch him! And there could be a kipper in it for you!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo snarled happily. This was more like it. Opera had begun to pall for him the moment he realized that no one was going to pour a bucket of cold water over the singers. He understood chasing things.</p>

<p class="para">Besides, he liked to play with his friends.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Agnes saw the movement out of the corner of her eye. A figure had jumped out of one of the Boxes and was climbing up to the balcony. Then another figure clambered after it, scrambling over the gilt cherubs.</p>

<p class="para">Singers faltered in mid-note. There was no mistaking the leading figure. It was the Ghost.<a id="page273"></a></p>


<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The Librarian was aware that the orchestra had stopped playing. Somewhere on the other side of the backcloth the singers had stopped, too. There was a buzz of excited conversation and one or two cries.</p>

<p class="para">The hairs all over his body began to prickle. Senses designed to protect his species in the depths of the rain forest had adjusted nicely to the conditions of a big city, which was merely drier and had more carnivores.</p>

<p class="para">He picked up the discarded bow tie and, with great deliberation, tied it around his forehead so that he looked like a really formal Kamikaze warrior. Then he threw away the opera score and stared blankly into space for a moment. He knew instinctively that some situations required musical accompaniment.</p>

<p class="para">This organ lacked what he considered the most basic of facilities, such as the Thunder pedal, a 128-foot Earthquake pipe and a complete keyboard of animal noises, but he was certain there was something exciting that could be done in the bass register.</p>

<p class="para">He stretched out his arms and cracked his knuckles. This took some time.</p>

<p class="para">And then he began to play.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The Ghost danced along the edge of the balcony, scattering hats and opera glasses. The audience watched in astonishment, and then began to clap. They couldn&rsquo;t quite see how it fitted into the plot of the opera&mdash;but this <span class="italic">was</span> an opera, after all.<a id="page274"></a></p>


<p class="para">He reached the center of the balcony, trotted a little way up the aisle, and then turned and ran down again at speed. He reached the edge, jumped, jumped again, soared out into the auditorium&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&hellip;and landed on the chandelier, which jingled and began to sway gently.</p>

<p class="para">The audience stood up and applauded as he climbed through the jangling tiers toward the central cable.</p>

<p class="para">Then another shape clambered over the edge of the balcony and loped along in pursuit. This was a stockier figure than the first man, one-eyed, broad in the shoulders and tapering at the waist; he looked evil in an interesting kind of way, like a pirate who really understood the words &ldquo;Jolly Roger.&rdquo; He didn&rsquo;t even take a run but, when he reached the closest part to the chandelier, simply launched himself into space.</p>

<p class="para">It was clear that he wasn&rsquo;t going to make it.</p>

<p class="para">And then it wasn&rsquo;t clear how he did.</p>

<p class="para">Those watching through opera glasses swore later that the man thrust out an arm which merely seemed to graze the chandelier and yet was then somehow able to swivel his entire body in mid-air.</p>

<p class="para">A couple of people swore even harder that, just as the man reached out, his fingernails appeared to grow by several inches.</p>

<p class="para">The huge glass mountain swung ponderously on its rope and, as it reached the end of the swing, Greebo swung out farther, like a trapeze artist. There was an appreciative &ldquo;oo&rdquo; from the audience.</p>

<p class="para">He twisted again. The chandelier hesitated for a moment at the extremity of its arc, and then swept back again.<a id="page275"></a></p>


<p class="para">As it jangled and creaked over the Stalls the hanging figure swung upward, let go and did a backward somersault that dropped him in the middle of the crystals. Candles and prisms were scattered over the seats below.</p>

<p class="para">And then, with the audience clapping and cheering, he scrambled up the rope after the fleeing Ghost.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Henry Lawsy tried to move his arm, but a fallen crystal had stapled the sleeve of his coat to his arm rest.</p>

<p class="para">It was a quandary. He was pretty sure this wasn&rsquo;t supposed to happen, but he wasn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">certain</span>.</p>

<p class="para">Around him he could hear people hissing questions.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Was that part of the plot?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure it must have been.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes. Yes. It certainly was,&rdquo; said someone farther down the row, authoritatively. &ldquo;Yes. Yes. The famous chase scene. Indeed. Oh, yes. They did it in Quirm, you know.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh&hellip;yes. Yes, of course. I&rsquo;m sure I heard about it&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought it was bloody good,&rdquo; said Mrs. Lawsy.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mother!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;About time something interesting happened. You should&rsquo;ve told me. I&rsquo;d&rsquo;ve put my glasses on.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Nanny Ogg pounded up the back stairs toward the fly loft.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Something&rsquo;s gone wrong!&rdquo; she muttered under <a id="page276"></a>her breath as she took the stairs two at a time. &ldquo;She reckons she&rsquo;s only got to stare at &rsquo;em and they&rsquo;re toffee in her hands, and then who has to sort it out afterward, eh? Go on, guess&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The ancient wooden door at the top of the stairs gave way to Nanny Ogg&rsquo;s boot with Nanny Ogg&rsquo;s momentum behind it, and cracked open onto a big, shadowy space. It was full of running figures. Legs flickered in the light of lanterns. People were shouting.</p>

<p class="para">A figure ran straight toward her.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny sprang into a crouch, both thumbs on the cork of the badly shaken champagne bottle she held cradled under one arm.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is a magnum,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;and I&rsquo;m not afraid to drink it!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The figure stopped. &ldquo;Oh, it&rsquo;s you, Mrs. Ogg&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny&rsquo;s infallible memory for personal details threw up a card. &ldquo;Peter, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; she said, relaxing. &ldquo;The one with the bad feet?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s right, Mrs. Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The powder I give you is working, is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They&rsquo;re a lot better now, Mrs. Ogg&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So what&rsquo;s been happening?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Salzella caught the Ghost!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Now that Nanny&rsquo;s eyes had managed to discern some order in the chaos, she could see a cluster of people in the middle of the floor, around the chandelier.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella was sitting on the planking. His collar was torn and a sleeve had been ripped off his jacket, but he had a triumphant look in his eyes.</p>

<p class="para">He waved something in the air.<a id="page277"></a></p>


<p class="para">It was white. It looked like a piece of a skull.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It was Plinge!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I tell you, it was Walter Plinge! Why are you all standing around? Get after him!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter?&rdquo; said one of the men, doubtfully.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, <span class="italic">Walter</span>!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Another man hurried up, waving his lantern.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I saw the Ghost heading up to the roof! And there was some big one-eyed bastard going after him like a scalded cat!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">That&rsquo;s wrong</span>, thought Nanny. <span class="italic">Something wrong here</span>.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;To the roof!&rdquo; shouted Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hadn&rsquo;t we better get the flaming torches first?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Flaming torches are not compulsory!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Pitchforks and scythes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s only for vampires!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How about just <span class="italic">one</span> torch?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Get up there now! Understand?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The curtains closed. There was a smattering of applause which was barely audible above the chatter from the audience.</p>

<p class="para">The chorus turned to one another. &ldquo;Was that supposed to happen?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Dust rained down. Stagehands were scampering across the gantries far above. Shouts echoed among the ropes and dusty backdrops. A stagehand ran across the stage, holding a flaming torch.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Here, what&rsquo;s going on?&rdquo; said a tenor.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;They&rsquo;ve got the Ghost! He&rsquo;s heading for the roof! It&rsquo;s Walter <span class="italic">Plinge</span>!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What, Walter?&rdquo;<a id="page278"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Our</span> Walter Plinge?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The stagehand ran on in a trail of sparks, leaving the yeast of rumor to ferment in the ready dough that was the chorus.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter? Surely not!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Weeelll&hellip;he&rsquo;s a bit odd, isn&rsquo;t he&hellip;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But only this morning he said to me, &lsquo;It&rsquo;s a nice day Mr. Sidney!&rsquo; Just like that. Normal as anything. Well&hellip;normal for Walter&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;As a matter of fact, it&rsquo;s always worried me, the way his eyes move as though they don&rsquo;t talk to each other&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And he&rsquo;s always around the place!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but he&rsquo;s the odd-job man&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No argument about that!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not Walter,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">They looked at her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s who he said they&rsquo;re chasing, dear.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know who they&rsquo;re chasing, but Walter&rsquo;s not the Ghost. Fancy anyone thinking Walter&rsquo;s the Ghost!&rdquo; said Agnes, hotly. &ldquo;He wouldn&rsquo;t hurt a fly! Anyway, I&rsquo;ve seen&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s always struck me as a bit slimy, though.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And they say he goes down into the cellars a lot. What for, I ask myself? Let&rsquo;s face it. Fair&rsquo;s fair. He&rsquo;s crazy.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He doesn&rsquo;t act crazy!&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, he always looks as though he&rsquo;s about to, you must admit. I&rsquo;m going to see what&rsquo;s happening. Anyone coming?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes gave up. It was a horrible thing to learn, but there are times when evidence gets trampled and the hunt is on.<a id="page279"></a></p>


<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">A hatch flew open. The Ghost clambered out, looked down, and slammed the hatch shut. There was a yowl from below.</p>

<p class="para">Then he danced across the leads until he reached the gargoyle-encrusted parapet, black and silver in the moonlight. The wind caught at his cloak as he ran along the very edge of the roof and dropped down again near another door.</p>

<p class="para">And a gargoyle was suddenly no longer a gargoyle, but a figure that reached down suddenly and twitched off his mask.</p>

<p class="para">It was like cutting strings.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good evening, Walter,&rdquo; said Granny, as he sagged to his knees.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hello Missus Weatherwax!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mistress,&rdquo; Granny corrected him. &ldquo;Now stand up.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a growl farther along the roof, and then a thump. Bits of trapdoor rose for a moment against the moonlight.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s nice up here, ain&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s fresh air and stars. I thought: up or down? But there&rsquo;s only rats down below.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">In another swift movement she grabbed Walter&rsquo;s chin and tilted it, just as Greebo pulled himself onto the roof with prolonged murder in his heart.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How does your mind work, Walter Plinge? If your house was on fire, what&rsquo;s the first thing you&rsquo;d try to take out?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo stalked along the rooftop, growling. He liked rooftops in general, and some of his fondest memories involved them, but a trapdoor had just <a id="page280"></a>been slammed on his head and he was looking for anything he could disembowel.</p>

<p class="para">Then he recognized the shape of Walter Plinge as someone who had given him food. And, standing right next to him, the much more unwelcome shape of Granny Weatherwax, who had once caught him digging in her garden and had kicked him in the cucumbers.</p>

<p class="para">Walter said something. Greebo didn&rsquo;t take much notice of it.</p>

<p class="para">Granny Weatherwax said: &ldquo;Well done. A good answer. Greebo!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo nudged Walter heavily in the back.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Want milluk right noaow! Purr, purr!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny thrust the mask at the cat. In the distance people were running up stairs and shouting.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You put this on! And you stay down real low, Walter Plinge. One man in a mask is pretty much like another, after all. And when they chase you, Greebo&hellip;give them a run for their money. Do it right and there could be&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yurr, I knoaow,&rdquo; said Greebo despondently, taking the mask. It was turning out to be a long and busy evening for a kipper.</p>

<p class="para">Someone poked their head out of the stricken trapdoor. The light glinted off Greebo&rsquo;s mask&hellip;and it had to be said, even by Granny, that he made a good Ghost. For one thing, his morphogenic field was trying to reassert itself. His claws could no longer even remotely be thought of as fingernails.</p>

<p class="para">He spat at the pursuit as they poured up the steps, arched his back dramatically on the very edge of the roof, and stepped off.</p>

<p class="para">One story down he thrust out an arm, caught a  <a id="page281"></a>windowsill, and landed on the head of a gargoyle, which said &ldquo;Oh, fank oo ver&rsquo; mush&rdquo; in a reproachful voice.</p>

<p class="para">The pursuers looked down at him. Some of them <span class="italic">had</span> managed to get hold of flaming torches, because sometimes convention is too strong to be lightly denied.</p>

<p class="para">Greebo snarled defiance and dropped again, springing from sill to drain pipe to balcony and pausing every now and again for another dramatic pose and another snarl at the pursuers.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;d better get after him, Corporal de Nobbs,&rdquo; said one of them, who was staggering along behind.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;d better get after him by carefully going back down the stairs, you mean. &rsquo;Cos somethin&rsquo; I drank don&rsquo;t want to stay drunk. Much more runnin&rsquo; and I&rsquo;ll be droppin&rsquo; a custard, I&rsquo;m tellin&rsquo; you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The other members of the posse also seemed to be reaching the conclusion that there was no extended future in chasing a man down the sheer wall of a building. As one mob they turned and, shouting and waving their torches in the air, headed back to the stairs.</p>

<p class="para">The parting crowd revealed Nanny Ogg, holding a pitchfork in one hand and a torch in the other and thrusting them both in the air while muttering, &ldquo;Rhubarb, rhubarb.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny walked over and tapped her on the shoulder. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve gone, Gytha.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Rhuba&mdash;Oh, hello, Esme,&rdquo; said Nanny, lowering the implements of righteous retribution. &ldquo;I was just tagging along to see it didn&rsquo;t get out of hand. Was that Greebo I saw just then?&rdquo;<a id="page282"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Awww, bless him,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;He looked a bit bothered, though. I hope he doesn&rsquo;t happen to anybody.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;s your broomstick?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s in the cleaners&rsquo; cupboard backstage.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then I&rsquo;ll borrow it and keep an eye on things,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hey, he&rsquo;s <span class="italic">my</span> cat, I ought to be looking after him&mdash;&rdquo; Nanny began.</p>

<p class="para">Granny stepped aside, revealing a huddled shape sitting hugging its knees. &ldquo;You look after Walter Plinge,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s something you&rsquo;d be better at than me.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hello Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo; said Walter, mournfully.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny looked at him for a moment.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;So he is the&mdash;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You mean he really did do the mur&mdash;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do <span class="italic">you</span> think?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, if it comes to it, I think he didn&rsquo;t,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Can I have a word in your ear, Esme? I don&rsquo;t reckon I should say this in front of young Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The witches bent their heads together. There was a brief whispered conversation.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Everything is simple when you know the answer,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll be back soon.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She hurried off. Nanny heard her shoes clattering on the stairs.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny looked down at Walter again, and held out her hand. &ldquo;Up you get, Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I expect we&rsquo;d better find somewhere for you to lie low, eh?&rdquo;<a id="page283"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;I know a hidden place Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You do, do you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter lurched across the roof toward another trapdoor, and pointed to it proudly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That?&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;That doesn&rsquo;t look very hidden to me, Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter gave it a puzzled look, and then grinned in the way a scientist might after he&rsquo;d solved a particularly difficult equation. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s hidden where everyone can see it Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny gave him a sharp look, but there was nothing but a slightly glazed innocence in Walter&rsquo;s eyes.</p>

<p class="para">He lifted up the trapdoor and pointed politely downward. &ldquo;You go down the ladder first so I will not see your drawers!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Very&hellip;kind of you,&rdquo; said Nanny. It was the first time anyone had ever said anything like that to her.</p>

<p class="para">The man waited patiently until she had reached the bottom of the ladder, and then climbed laboriously down after her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is just an old staircase, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; said Nanny, prodding at the darkness with her torch.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes! It goes all the way down! Except at the bottom where it goes all the way up!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Anyone else know about it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The Ghost Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo; said Walter, climbing down.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes,&rdquo; said Nanny slowly. &ldquo;And where&rsquo;s the Ghost now, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He ran away!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She held up the torch. There was still nothing to be read in Walter&rsquo;s expression. &ldquo;What does the Ghost do here, Walter?&rdquo;<a id="page284"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;He watches over the Opera!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s very kind of him, I&rsquo;m sure.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny started downward, and as the shadows danced around her she heard Walter say: &ldquo;You know she asked me a very silly question Mrs. Ogg! It was a silly question any fool knows the answer!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes,&rdquo; said Nanny, peering at the walls. &ldquo;About houses on fire, I expect&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes! What would I take out of our house if it was on fire!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I expect you were a good boy and said you&rsquo;d take your mum,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No! My mum would take herself!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny ran her hands over the nearest wall. Doors had been nailed shut when the staircase had been abandoned. Someone walking up and down here, with a keen pair of ears, could hear a lot of things&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What would you take out then, Walter?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The fire!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny stared unseeing at the wall, and then her face slowly broke into a grin.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re daft, Walter Plinge,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Daft as a broom Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo; said Walter cheerfully.</p>

<p class="para">But you ain&rsquo;t insane, she thought. You&rsquo;re daft but you&rsquo;re sane. That&rsquo;s what Esme would say. And there&rsquo;s worser things.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Greebo pounded along Broadway. He was suddenly not feeling very well. Muscles were twitching in odd ways. A tingling at the base of his spine indi<a id="page285"></a>cated that his tail wanted to grow, and his ears definitely wanted to creep up the sides of his head, which is always embarrassing when it happens in company.</p>

<p class="para">In this case the company was about a hundred yards behind and apparently intent on moving his ears quite a long way from their current position, embarrassment or not.</p>

<p class="para">It was gaining, too. Greebo normally had a famous turn of speed, but not when his knees were trying to reverse direction every few seconds.</p>

<p class="para">His normal plan when pursued was to jump onto the water-butt behind Nanny Ogg&rsquo;s cottage and rake the pursuer across the nose with his claws when it came around the corner. Since this would now involve a five-hundred-mile dash, an alternative had to be sought.</p>

<p class="para">There was a coach waiting outside one of the houses. He lurched over to it, pulled himself up, grabbed the reins and briefly turned his attention to the driver.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Get orfff.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo&rsquo;s teeth shone in the moonlight. The coachman, with great presence of mind and urgent absence of body, somersaulted backward into the night.</p>

<p class="para">The horses reared, and tried to break into a gallop from a standing start. Animals are less capable of being fooled than are humans; they knew that what they had behind them was a very large cat, and the fact that it was man-shaped didn&rsquo;t make them any happier.</p>

<p class="para">The coach lumbered off. Greebo looked over his twitching shoulder at the torchlit crowd and waved <a id="page286"></a>a paw derisively. The effect pleased him so much that he clambered onto the roof of the swaying coach and continued to jeer.</p>

<p class="para">It is a catlike attribute to spit defiance at the enemy from a place of safety. In the circumstances it would have been better if catlike attributes had included the ability to steer.</p>

<p class="para">A wheel hit the parapet of the Brass Bridge and scraped along it, the iron rim kicking up sparks. The shock knocked Greebo from his perch in midgesture. He landed on his feet in the middle of the road, while the terrified horses continued on with the coach rocking dangerously from side to side.</p>

<p class="para">The pursuers stopped.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;s he doing now?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s just standing there.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There&rsquo;s only one of him and there&rsquo;s lots of us, right? We could easily overpower him.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good idea. On the count of three, we&rsquo;ll all rush him, right? One&hellip;two&hellip;three&hellip;&rdquo; Pause. &ldquo;You didn&rsquo;t run.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, nor did you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but I was the one saying &lsquo;one, two, three.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Remember what he did to Mr. Pounder!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, well, I never liked the man all that much&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Greebo snarled. Ticklish things were happening to his body. He threw his head back and roared.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Look, at worst he&rsquo;d only be able to get one or two of us&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, that&rsquo;s good, is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Here, why&rsquo;s he twisting around like that?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Maybe he hurt himself falling off the coach&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s get him!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The mob closed in. Greebo, struggling against a <a id="page287"></a>morphogenic field swinging wildly between species, punched the first man in the face with a hand and clawed the shirt off another man with something more like a giant paw.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, shiiiooooo&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Twenty hands grabbed him. And then, in the m&ecirc;l&eacute;e and the darkness, twenty hands were holding just cloth and emptiness. Vengeful boots connected with nothing more than air. Clubs that had been swung at a snarling face whirled through empty space and returned to hit their owner on the ear.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;ooooaaawwwwl!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Quite unnoticed in the scrum, a flat-eared bullet of gray fur shot out from between the scuffling legs.</p>

<p class="para">The kicking and punching stopped only when it became apparent that all the mob was attacking was itself. And, since the IQ of a mob is the IQ of its most stupid member divided by the number of mobsters, it was never very clear to anyone what had happened. Obviously they&rsquo;d closed in on the Ghost, and he certainly couldn&rsquo;t have escaped. All that was left was a mask and some torn clothing. So, the mob reasoned, he must have ended up in the river. And good riddance, too.</p>

<p class="para">Happy in the knowledge of a job well done, they adjourned to the nearest pub.</p>

<p class="para">This left Sergeant Count de Tritus and Corporal the Count de Nobby Nobbs, who lurched to the middle of the bridge and regarded the few scraps of cloth.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Commander Vimes isn&rsquo;t&hellip;isn&rsquo;t&hellip;isn&rsquo;t goin&rsquo; to like dis,&rdquo; said Detritus. &ldquo;You know he likes prisoners to be alive.&rdquo;<a id="page288"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Yeah, but this one would&rsquo;ve been hung anyway,&rdquo; said Nobby, who was trying to stand upright. &ldquo;This way was just a bit more&hellip;democratic. A great saving in terms of rope, not to mention wear and tear on locks and keys.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Detritus scratched his head. &ldquo;Shouldn&rsquo;t there be some blood?&rdquo; he ventured.</p>

<p class="para">Nobby gave him a sour look. &ldquo;He couldn&rsquo;t&rsquo;ve got away,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;So don&rsquo;t go asking questions like that.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Only, if humans is hit hard enough, they leaks all over der place,&rdquo; said Detritus.</p>

<p class="para">Nobby sighed. That was the caliber of people you got in the Watch these days. They had to make a mystery of things. In days gone by, when it had been just the old gang and an unofficial policy of <span class="italic">lazy fair</span>, they&rsquo;d have said a heartfelt &ldquo;Well done, lads&rdquo; to the vigilantes and turned in early. But now old Vimes had been promoted to Commander he seemed to be enrolling people who asked questions all the time. It was even affecting Detritus, considered by other trolls to be as dim as a dead glowworm.</p>

<p class="para">Detritus reached down and picked up an eye patch.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What d&rsquo;you think, then?&rdquo; said Nobby scornfully. &ldquo;You think he turned into a bat and flew away?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ha! I do not t&rsquo;ink that &rsquo;cos it is in&hellip;consist&hellip;ent with modern policing,&rdquo; said Detritus.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, <span class="italic">I</span> think,&rdquo; said Nobby, &ldquo;that when you have ruled out the impossible, what is left, however improbable, ain&rsquo;t worth hanging around on a cold night wonderin&rsquo; about when you could be getting <a id="page289"></a>on the outside of a big drink. Come on. I want to try a leg of the elephant that bit me.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Was dat irony?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That was metaphor.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Detritus, uneasy in what was technically his mind, prodded at the torn pieces of clothing.</p>

<p class="para">Something brushed against his leg. It was a cat. It had tattered ears, one good eye, and a face like a fist with fur on it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hello, little cat,&rdquo; said Detritus.</p>

<p class="para">The cat stretched and grinned. &ldquo;Gerrt lorssst, coppuurrrr&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Detritus blinked. There are no such things as troll cats, and Detritus had never seen a cat before he&rsquo;d arrived in Ankh-Morpork and discovered that they were very, very hard to eat. And he&rsquo;d never heard of them talking. On the other hand, he was very much aware of his reputation as the most stupid person in the city, and he wasn&rsquo;t going to draw attention to a talking cat if it were going to turn out that everybody except him knew that they talked all the time.</p>

<p class="para">In the gutter, a few feet away, there was something white. He picked it up carefully. It looked like the mask the Ghost had worn.</p>

<p class="para">This was probably a Clue.</p>

<p class="para">He waved it urgently. &ldquo;Hey, Nobby&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Thank you.&rdquo; Something dipped through the darkness, snatched the mask from the troll&rsquo;s hand, and soared into the night.</p>

<p class="para">Corporal Nobbs turned around. &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;how big are birds? Normally?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, blimey, I dunno. Some are small, some are big. Who cares?&rdquo;<a id="page290"></a></p>


<p class="para">Detritus sucked his finger. &ldquo;Oh, no reason,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I am far too smart to be taken in by perfec&rsquo;ly normal t&rsquo;ings.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Something squelched underfoot.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s pretty damp down here, Walter,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">And the air was stale and heavy and seemed to be squeezing the light from the torch. There was a dark edge to the flame.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not far now Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Keys jingled in the darkness, and some hinges creaked.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I found this Mrs. Ogg! It&rsquo;s the Ghost&rsquo;s secret cave!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Secret cave, eh?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You got to shut your eyes! You got to shut your eyes!&rdquo; said Walter urgently.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny did so, but to her shame kept a grip on the torch, just in case. She said: &ldquo;And is the Ghost in there, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was the rattle of a matchbox and some scuffling, and then&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You can open them now Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny did so.</p>

<p class="para">Color and light blurred and then swam into focus, first in her eyes and then, eventually, in her brain. &ldquo;Oh, my,&rdquo; she murmured. &ldquo;Oh, my, my&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There were candles, the big flat ones used to illuminate the stage, floating in shallow bowls. The light they gave was soft, and it rippled over the room like the soul of water.<a id="page291"></a></p>


<p class="para">It glinted off the beak of a huge swan. It glittered in the eye of a vast, sagging dragon.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg turned slowly. Her experience of opera had not been a lengthy one but witches pick things up quickly, and <span class="italic">there</span> was the winged helmet worn by Hildabrun in <span class="italic">The Ring of the Nibelungingung</span>, and <span class="italic">here</span> was the striped pole from <span class="italic">The Barber of Pseudopolis</span>, and <span class="italic">there</span> was the pantomime horse with the humorous trapdoor from <span class="italic">The Enchanted Piccolo</span>, and here&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&hellip;here was opera, all piled in a heap. Once the eye had taken it all in, it had time to notice the peeling paint and rotting plaster and the general air of gentle moldering. The decrepit props and threadbare costumes had been dumped in here because people didn&rsquo;t want them anywhere else.</p>

<p class="para">But someone <span class="italic">did</span> want them here. After the eye had seen the ruin, then there was time for it to see the little patches of recent repair, the careful areas of fresh paint.</p>

<p class="para">There was something like a desk in the tiny area of floor not occupied by the props. And then Nanny realized that it had a keyboard and a stool, and there were neat piles of paper on top of it.</p>

<p class="para">Walter was watching her with a big, proud grin.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny ambled over to the thing. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a harmonium, ain&rsquo;t it? A tiny organ?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s right Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny picked up one of the sheaves of paper. Her lips moved as she read the meticulous copperplate writing.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;An opera about <span class="italic">cats</span>?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Never heard of an opera about <span class="italic">cats&hellip;</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She thought for a moment, and then added to <a id="page292"></a>herself: But why not? It&rsquo;s a damn good idea. The lives of cats are just like operas, when you come to think about it.</p>

<p class="para">She leafed through the other piles. &ldquo;<span class="italic">Guys and Trolls? Hubward Side Story? Miserable Les?</span> Who&rsquo;s he? <span class="italic">Seven Dwarfs for Seven Other Dwarfs?</span> What&rsquo;re all these, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She sat down on the stool and pressed a few of the cracked yellow keys, which moved with an audible creak. There were a couple of large pedals under the harmonium. You pedaled these and that worked the bellows and these spongy keys produced something which was to organ music what &ldquo;poot&rdquo; was to cursing.</p>

<p class="para">So this was where Wal&hellip;where the Ghost sat, thought Nanny, down under the stage, among the discarded wreckage of old performances; down under the huge windowless room where, night after night, music and songs and rampant emotion echoed back and forth and never escaped or entirely died away. The Ghost worked down here, with a mind as open as a well, and it filled up with opera. Opera went in at the ears, and something else came out of the mind.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny pumped the pedals a few times. Air hissed from inefficient seams. She tried a few notes. They were reedy. But, she considered, sometimes the old lie was true, and size really did not matter. It really was what you did with it that counted.</p>

<p class="para">Walter watched her expectantly.</p>

<p class="para">She took down another wad of paper and peered at the first page. But Walter leaned over and snatched at the script.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That one&rsquo;s not finished Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;<a id="page293"></a></p>


<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The Opera House was still in uproar. Half the audience had gone outside and the other half was hanging around in case further interesting events were going to transpire. The orchestra was in a huddle in the pit, preparing its request for a special Being Upset By A Ghost Allowance. The curtains were closed. Some of the chorus had stayed onstage; others had hurried off to take part in the chase. The air had the excited electric feel it gets when normal civilized life is temporarily short-circuited.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes bounced frantically from rumor to rumor. The Ghost had been caught, and it was Walter Plinge. The Ghost had been caught <span class="italic">by</span> Walter Plinge. The Ghost had been caught by someone else. The Ghost had escaped. The Ghost was dead.</p>

<p class="para">There were arguments breaking out everywhere.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I still can&rsquo;t believe it was Walter! I mean, good grief&hellip;Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What about the show? We can&rsquo;t just stop! You <span class="italic">never</span> stop the show, not even if someone dies!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, we have stopped when people died&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but only as long as it took to get the body offstage!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes stepped back into the wings, and trod on something. &ldquo;Sorry,&rdquo; she said automatically.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It was only my foot,&rdquo; said Granny Weatherwax. &ldquo;So&hellip;how is life in the big city, Agnes Nitt?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes turned. &ldquo;Oh&hellip;hello, Granny&hellip;&rdquo; she mumbled. &ldquo;And I&rsquo;m not Agnes here, thank you,&rdquo; she added, a shade more defiantly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a good job, is it, bein&rsquo; someone else&rsquo;s voice?&rdquo;<a id="page294"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m doing what I want to do,&rdquo; said Agnes. She drew herself up to her full width. &ldquo;And you can&rsquo;t stop me!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But you ain&rsquo;t part of it, are you?&rdquo; said Granny conversationally. &ldquo;You try, but you always find yourself watchin&rsquo; yourself watchin&rsquo; people, eh? Never quite believin&rsquo; anything? Thinkin&rsquo; the wrong thoughts?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shut up!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah. Thought so.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I have no intention of becoming a witch, thank you very much!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Now, don&rsquo;t go getting upset just because you know it&rsquo;s going to happen. A witch you&rsquo;re going to be because a witch you are, and if you turn your back on him now then I don&rsquo;t know what&rsquo;s going to happen to Walter Plinge.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s not dead?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes hesitated. &ldquo;I <span class="italic">knew</span> he was the Ghost,&rdquo; she began. &ldquo;But then I saw he couldn&rsquo;t be.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Believed the evidence of your own eyes, did you? In a place like this?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;One of the stagehands just told me they chased him up onto the roof and then down into the street and beat him to death!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, well,&rdquo; said Granny, &ldquo;you&rsquo;ll never get anywhere if you believe what you <span class="italic">hear</span>. What do you <span class="italic">know</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What do you mean, what do I know?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t try cleverness on me, miss.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes looked at Granny&rsquo;s expression, and knew when to fold. &ldquo;I know he&rsquo;s the Ghost,&rdquo; she said.<a id="page295"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Right.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But I can see that he isn&rsquo;t.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And I know&hellip;I&rsquo;m pretty <span class="italic">sure</span> he doesn&rsquo;t mean any harm.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good. Well done. Walter might not know his right from his left, but he does know his right from his wrong.&rdquo; Granny rubbed her hands together. &ldquo;Well, we&rsquo;re already home and looking for a clean towel, eh?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What? You haven&rsquo;t solved anything!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Course we have. We know that it wasn&rsquo;t Walter what done the murders, so now we just have to find out who it was. Easy.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;s Walter now?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Nanny&rsquo;s got him somewhere.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&rsquo;s all by herself?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I told you, she&rsquo;s got Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I meant&hellip;well, he&rsquo;s a bit strange.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Only where it shows.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes sighed, and started to say that it wasn&rsquo;t her problem. And realized it was useless even to try. The knowledge sat like a smug intruder in her mind. Whatever it was, it was her problem.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll help you if I can, because I&rsquo;m here. But afterward&hellip;that&rsquo;s <span class="italic">it</span>! Afterward, you&rsquo;ll leave me alone. Promise?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Certainly.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well&hellip;all right, then&hellip;&rdquo; Agnes stopped. &ldquo;Oh, no,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;That was too easy. I don&rsquo;t trust you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t trust me?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re saying you don&rsquo;t trust me?&rdquo;<a id="page296"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. I don&rsquo;t. You&rsquo;ll find a way to wriggle around it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I never wriggle,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s Nanny Ogg who thinks we ought to have a third witch. I reckon life&rsquo;s difficult enough without some girl cluttering up the place just because she thinks she looks good in a pointy hat.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a pause. Then Agnes said, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not falling for <span class="italic">that</span> one, either. It&rsquo;s where you say I&rsquo;m too stupid to be a witch and I say, oh no I&rsquo;m not, and you end up winning again. I&rsquo;d rather be someone else&rsquo;s voice than some old witch with no friends and having everyone frightened of me and being nothing more than just a bit cleverer than other people and not doing any <span class="italic">real</span> magic at all&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny put her head on one side.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Seems to me you&rsquo;re so sharp you might cut yourself,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right. When it&rsquo;s all over, I&rsquo;ll let you go your own way. I won&rsquo;t stop you. Now show me the way to Mr. Bucket&rsquo;s office&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Nanny smiled her jolly-wrinkled-old-apple smile. &ldquo;Now, you just hand it over, Walter,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;No harm in letting me see it, is there? Not old Nanny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Can&rsquo;t see it till it&rsquo;s finished!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, now,&rdquo; said Nanny, hating herself for dropping the atom bomb, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure your mam wouldn&rsquo;t want to hear that you&rsquo;ve been a bad boy, would she?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Expressions floated over Walter&rsquo;s waxen features as he struggled with several ideas at once. Finally, without a word, he thrust the bundle at her, his arms trembling with tension.<a id="page297"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a <span class="italic">good</span> boy,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">She glanced at the first few pages, and then moved them nearer to the light. &ldquo;Hmm.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She treadled the harmonium for a while and played a few notes with her left hand. They represented most of the musical notes she knew how to read. It was a very simple little theme, such as might be picked out on the keyboard with one finger. &ldquo;Hey&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Her lips moved as she read the narrative.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well now, Walter,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;isn&rsquo;t this a sort of opera about a ghost who lives in an opera house?&rdquo; She turned a page. &ldquo;Very smart and debonair, he is. He&rsquo;s got a secret cave, I see&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She played another short riff. &ldquo;Catchy music, too.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She read on, occasionally saying things like &ldquo;Well, well&rdquo; and &ldquo;Lawks.&rdquo; Every now and again she&rsquo;d give Walter an appraising look.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I wonder why the Ghost wrote this, Walter?&rdquo; she said, after a while. &ldquo;Quiet sort of chap, ain&rsquo;t he? Put it all into his music.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter stared at his feet. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s going to be a lot of trouble Mrs. Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, me and Granny will sort it all out,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s wrong to tell lies,&rdquo; said Walter.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Probably,&rdquo; said Nanny, who&rsquo;d never let it worry her up to now.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It wouldn&rsquo;t be right for our mum to lose her job Mrs. Ogg.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It wouldn&rsquo;t be right, no.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The feeling drifted over Nanny that Walter was trying to put across some sort of message. &ldquo;Er&hellip;<a id="page298"></a>what sort of lies would it be wrong to tell, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter&rsquo;s eyes bulged. &ldquo;Lies&hellip;about things you see Mrs. Ogg! Even if you did see them!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny thought it was probably time to present the Oggish point of view. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s all right to tell lies if you don&rsquo;t <span class="italic">think</span> lies,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He said our mum would lose her job and I&rsquo;d be locked up if I said Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Did he? Which &lsquo;he&rsquo; was he?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The Ghost Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I reckon Granny ought to have a good look at you, Walter,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;I reckon your mind&rsquo;s all tangled up like a ball of string what&rsquo;s been dropped.&rdquo; She pedaled the harmonium thoughtfully. &ldquo;Was it the Ghost that wrote all this music, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s wrong to tell lies about the room with the sacks in it Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">Ah</span>, thought Nanny. &ldquo;That&rsquo;d be down here, would it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He said I wasn&rsquo;t to tell anyone!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who did?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The Ghost Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But you&rsquo;re&mdash;&rdquo; Nanny began, and then tried another way. &ldquo;Ah, but I ain&rsquo;t anyone,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Anyway, if you was to go to this room with the sacks and I was to follow you, that wouldn&rsquo;t be telling anyone, would it? It wouldn&rsquo;t be your fault if some ole woman followed you, would it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter&rsquo;s face was an agony of indecision but, erratic though his thinking might have been, it was no match for Nanny Ogg&rsquo;s meretricious duplicity. He was up against a mind that regarded truth as a <a id="page299"></a>reference point but certainly not as a shackle. Nanny Ogg could think her way through a corkscrew in a tornado without touching the sides.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Anyway, it&rsquo;s all right if it&rsquo;s me,&rdquo; she added for good measure. &ldquo;In fact, he prob&rsquo;ly meant to say &lsquo;except for Mrs. Ogg,&rsquo; only he forgot.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Slowly, Walter reached out and picked up a candle. Without saying a word he walked out of the door and into the damp darkness of the cellars.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg followed him, her boots making squelching noises in the mud.</p>

<p class="para">It didn&rsquo;t seem like much of a distance. As far as Nanny could work out they were no longer under the Opera House, but it was hard to be sure. Their shadows danced around them and they walked through other rooms, even more dark and dripping than the ones they&rsquo;d been in. Walter stopped in front of a pile of timber that glistened with rot, and pulled a few of the spongy planks aside.</p>

<p class="para">There were some sacks neatly piled.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny kicked one, and it broke.</p>

<p class="para">In the flickering candlelight all that she could really see were sparkles of light as the cascade poured out, but there was no mistaking the gentle metallic scraping of lots of money. Lots and lots of money. Enough money to suggest very clearly that it belonged to either a thief or a publisher, and there didn&rsquo;t seem to be any books around.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;s this, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the Ghost&rsquo;s money Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a square hole in the opposite corner of the room. Water glinted a few inches below. Beside the hole were half a dozen containers of var<a id="page300"></a>ious sorts&mdash;old biscuit tins, broken bowls and the like. There was a stick, or possibly a dead shrub, in each one.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And those, Walter? What are those?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Rose bushes Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Down here? But nothing could gr&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny stopped.</p>

<p class="para">She squelched over to the pots. They&rsquo;d been filled with muck scraped from the floor. The dead stems glistened with slime.</p>

<p class="para">Nothing could grow down here, of course. There was no light. Everything that grew needed something else to feed on. And&hellip;she moved the candle closer, and sniffed the fragrance. Yes. It was subtle, but it was there. Roses in darkness.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, my word, Walter Plinge,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Always one for the surprises, you are.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Books were piled on Mr. Bucket&rsquo;s desk.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What you&rsquo;re doing is <span class="italic">wrong</span>, Granny Weatherwax,&rdquo; said Agnes from the doorway.</p>

<p class="para">Granny glanced up. &ldquo;Wrong as living other people&rsquo;s lives for them?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;&rsquo;S&rsquo;matter of fact, there&rsquo;s something even worse than that, which is living other people&rsquo;s lives for yourself. That kind of wrong?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes said nothing. Granny Weatherwax couldn&rsquo;t <span class="italic">know</span>.</p>

<p class="para">Granny turned back to the books. &ldquo;Anyway, this only <span class="italic">looks</span> wrong. Appearances is deceivin&rsquo;. You just pay attention to watching the corridor, madam.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She riffled through the bits of torn envelope and scribbled notes that seemed to be the Opera  <a id="page301"></a>House&rsquo;s equivalent of proper accounts. It was a mess. In fact, it was more than a mess. It was far too much of a mess to be a real mess, because a real mess has occasional bits of coherence, bits of what might be called random order. Rather, it was the kind of erratic mess that suggested that someone had set out to be messy.</p>

<p class="para">Take the account books. They were full of tiny rows and columns, but someone hadn&rsquo;t thought it worthwhile to invest in lined paper and had handwriting that wandered a bit. There were forty rows on the left-hand side but only thirty-six by the time they reached the other side of the page. It was hard to spot because of the way your eyes watered.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What are you doing?&rdquo; said Agnes, tearing her gaze away from the corridor.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Amazin&rsquo;,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Some things is entered twice! And I reckon there&rsquo;s a page here where someone&rsquo;s added the month and taken away the time of day!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought you didn&rsquo;t like books,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t,&rdquo; said Granny, turning a page. &ldquo;They can look you right in the face and still lie. How many fiddle players are there in the band?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think there are nine violinists in the orchestra.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The correction appeared to pass unnoticed.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, there&rsquo;s a thing,&rdquo; said Granny, without moving her head. &ldquo;Seems that twelve of &rsquo;em are drawing wages, but three of &rsquo;em is over the page, so you mightn&rsquo;t notice.&rdquo; She looked up and rubbed her hands happily. &ldquo;Unless you&rsquo;ve got a good memory, that is.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She ran a skinny finger down another erratic column. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s a flying ratchet?&rdquo;<a id="page302"></a></p>


<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Says here &lsquo;Repairs to flying ratchet, new springs for rotation cog assembly, and making good. Hundred and sixty dollars and sixty-three pence.&rsquo; Hah!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She licked her finger and tried another page.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Even Nanny ain&rsquo;t this bad at numbers,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;To be this bad at numbers you&rsquo;ve got to be good. Hah! No wonder this place never makes any money. You might as well try to fill a sieve.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes darted into the room. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s someone coming!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny got up and blew out the lamp. &ldquo;You get behind the curtains,&rdquo; she commanded.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;re <span class="italic">you</span> going to do?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh&hellip;I&rsquo;ll just have to make myself inconspicuous&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes hurried across to the big window and turned to look at Granny, who was standing by the fireplace.</p>

<p class="para">The old witch faded. She didn&rsquo;t disappear. She merely slid into the background.</p>

<p class="para">An arm gradually became part of the mantelpiece. A fold of her dress was a piece of shadow. An elbow became the top of the chair behind her. Her face became one with a vase of faded flowers.</p>

<p class="para">She was still there, like the old woman in the puzzle picture they sometimes printed in the Almanack, where you could see the old woman <span class="italic">or</span> the young girl but not both at once, because one was made of the shadows of the other. Granny Weatherwax was standing by the fireplace, but you could see her only if you knew she was there.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes blinked. And there were just the shadows, the chair and the fire.<a id="page303"></a></p>


<p class="para">The door opened. She ducked behind the curtains, feeling as conspicuous as a strawberry in a stew, certain that the sound of her heart would give her away.</p>

<p class="para">The door shut, carefully, with barely a click. Footsteps crossed the floor. A wooden scraping noise might have been a chair being moved slightly.</p>

<p class="para">A scratch and a hiss were the sound of a match, striking. A clink was the glass of the lamp, being lifted&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">All noise ceased.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes crouched, every muscle suddenly screaming with the strain. The lamp hadn&rsquo;t been lit&mdash;she&rsquo;d have seen the light around the curtain.</p>

<p class="para">Someone out there was making no noise.</p>

<p class="para">Someone out there was suddenly suspicious.</p>

<p class="para">A floorboard squeaked verrrry slowwwly, as someone shifted their weight.</p>

<p class="para">She felt as if she was going to scream, or burst with the effort of silence. The handle of the window behind her, a mere point of pressure a moment ago, was trying seriously to become part of her life. Her mouth was so dry that she knew it&rsquo;d creak like a hinge if she dared to swallow.</p>

<p class="para">It couldn&rsquo;t be anyone who had a right to be here. People who had a right to be in places walked around noisily.</p>

<p class="para">The handle was getting really <span class="italic">personal</span>.</p>

<p class="para">Try to think of something else&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">The curtain moved. Someone was standing on the other side of it.</p>

<p class="para">If her throat weren&rsquo;t so arid she might be able to scream.</p>

<p class="para">She could <span class="italic">feel</span> the presence through the cloth. <a id="page304"></a>Any moment now, someone was going to twitch the curtain aside.</p>

<p class="para">She leapt, or as close to a leap as was feasible&mdash;it was a kind of vertical lumber, billowing the curtain aside, colliding with a slim body behind it, and ending on the floor in a tangle of limbs and ripping velvet.</p>

<p class="para">She gulped air, and pressed down on the squirming bundle below her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll scream!&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And if I do your eardrums will come down your nose!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The writhing stopped.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Perdifa?</span>&rdquo; said a muffled voice.</p>

<p class="para">Above her, the curtain rail sagged at one end and the brass rings, one at a time, spun toward the floor.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Nanny went back to the sacks. Each one bulged with round hard shapes that clinked gently under her questing finger.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is a lot of money, Walter,&rdquo; she said carefully.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny lost track of money fairly easily, although this didn&rsquo;t mean the subject didn&rsquo;t interest her: it was just that, beyond a certain point, it became dreamlike. All she could be sure of was that the amount in front of her would make <span class="italic">anyone&rsquo;s</span> drawers drop.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I suppose,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;that if I was to ask you how it&rsquo;d got here, you&rsquo;d say it was the Ghost, yes? Like the roses?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;<a id="page305"></a></p>


<p class="para">She gave him a worried look. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll be all right down here, will you?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll sit quiet? I reckon I need to talk to some people.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;s my mum Mrs. Ogg?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&rsquo;s having a nice sleep, Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter seemed satisfied with this.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;ll sit quiet in your&hellip;in that room, will you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mrs. Ogg!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a good boy.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She glanced at the money bags again. Money was trouble.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Agnes sat back.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; raised himself on his elbows and pulled the curtain off his face. &ldquo;What the hell were you doing there?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I was&mdash;What do you mean, what was <span class="italic">I</span> doing there? <span class="italic">You</span> were creeping around!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You were hiding behind the curtain!&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;, getting to his feet and fumbling for the matches again. &ldquo;Next time you blow out a lamp, remember it&rsquo;ll still be warm.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">We</span> were&hellip;on important business&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The lamp glowed. Andr&eacute; turned. &ldquo;We?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes nodded, and looked across at Granny. The witch hadn&rsquo;t moved, although it took a deliberate effort of will to focus on her among the shapes and shadows.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; picked up the lamp and stepped forward.</p>

<p class="para">The shadows shifted.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes strode across the room and waved a hand <a id="page306"></a>in the air. There was the chair back, there was the vase, there was&hellip;nothing else.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But she was there!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;A ghost, eh?&rdquo; said Andr&eacute; sarcastically.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes backed away.</p>

<p class="para">There is something about the light of a lamp held lower than someone&rsquo;s face. The shadows are wrong. They fall in unfortunate places. Teeth seem more prominent. Agnes came to realize that she was alone in a room in suspicious circumstances with a man whose face suddenly looked a lot more unpleasant than it had before.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I suggest,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;that you get back to the stage right now, yes? That would be the very best thing you could do. And don&rsquo;t meddle in things that don&rsquo;t concern you. You&rsquo;ve done too much as it is.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The fear hadn&rsquo;t drained out of Agnes, but it had found a space in which to metamorphose into anger.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t have to put up with that! For all I know, <span class="italic">you</span> might be the Ghost!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really? <span class="italic">I</span> was told that Walter Plinge was the Ghost,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;How many people did you tell? And now it turns out that he&rsquo;s dead&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, he&rsquo;s not!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">It was out before she could stop it. She&rsquo;d said it merely to wipe the sneer off his face. This happened. But the expression that replaced it was no improvement.</p>

<p class="para">A floorboard creaked.</p>

<p class="para">They both turned.</p>

<p class="para">There was a hat stand in the corner, next to a bookcase. There were a few coats and scarves hanging from it. It was surely only the way that the <a id="page307"></a>shadows fell that made it look, from this angle, like an old woman. Or&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Damn floors,&rdquo; said Granny, fading into the foreground. She stepped away from the coats.</p>

<p class="para">As Agnes said, later: it wasn&rsquo;t as though she&rsquo;d been invisible. She&rsquo;d simply become part of the scenery until she put herself forward again; she was there, but not <span class="italic">there</span>. She didn&rsquo;t stand out at all. She was as unnoticeable as the very best of butlers.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How did you get in?&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;I looked all round the room!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Seein&rsquo; is believin&rsquo;,&rdquo; said Granny, calmly. &ldquo;Of course, the trouble is that believin&rsquo; is also seein&rsquo;, and there&rsquo;s been too much of that round here lately. Now, I <span class="italic">know</span> you ain&rsquo;t the Ghost&hellip;so what are you, to be sneaking around in places where you shouldn&rsquo;t be?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I could ask you the same quest&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Me? I&rsquo;m a witch, and <span class="italic">I&rsquo;m pretty good at it</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&rsquo;s, er, from Lancre. Where I come from,&rdquo; Agnes mumbled, trying to look at her feet.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh? Not the one who wrote the book?&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve heard people talking about&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No! I&rsquo;m much worse than her, understand?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She is,&rdquo; mumbled Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; gave Granny a long look, like a man weighing up his chances. He must have decided that they were bobbing along the ceiling.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&hellip;hang around in dark places looking for trouble,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really? There&rsquo;s a nasty name for people like that,&rdquo; snapped Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s &lsquo;policeman.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page308"></a>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Nanny Ogg climbed out of the cellars, rubbing her chin thoughtfully. Musicians and singers were still milling around, uncertain about what was going to happen next. The Ghost had had the decency to be chased and killed during the interval. In theory that meant there was no reason why there shouldn&rsquo;t be a third act, as soon as Herr Trubelmacher had scoured the nearby pubs and dragged the orchestra back. The show must go on.</p>

<p class="para">Yes, she thought, it has to go on. It&rsquo;s like the buildup to a thunderstorm&hellip;no&hellip;it&rsquo;s more like making love. Yes. That was a far more Oggish metaphor. You put everything you&rsquo;ve got into it, so sooner or later there&rsquo;s a point where it&rsquo;s got to go on, because you can&rsquo;t imagine stopping. The stage manager could dock a couple of dollars from their wages and they&rsquo;d still go on, and everyone knew it. And they would still go on.</p>

<p class="para">She reached a ladder and climbed slowly into the flies.</p>

<p class="para">She hadn&rsquo;t been certain. She needed to be certain now.</p>

<p class="para">The fly loft was empty. She walked carefully along the catwalk until she was over the auditorium. The buzz of the audience came through the ceiling beneath her, slightly muffled.</p>

<p class="para">Light shone up at the point where the thick cable for the chandelier disappeared into the hole. She stepped out over the creaking trapdoor and peered down.</p>

<p class="para">Terrific heat almost frizzled her hair. A few yards below her hundreds of candles were burning.</p>
<a id="page309"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Dreadful if that lot fell down,&rdquo; she said quietly. &ldquo;I &rsquo;spect this place&rsquo;d go up like a haystack&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She let her gaze travel up and up the cable to the point, at just about waist-height, where it was half-cut through. You&rsquo;d never see it, if you weren&rsquo;t expecting to find it.</p>

<p class="para">Then her gaze dropped again, and moved across the gloomy, dusty floor until it found something half-hidden in the dust.</p>

<p class="para">Behind her, a shadow among the shadows rose to its feet, balanced itself carefully, and started to run.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;I knows about policemen,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve got big helmets and big feet and you can see them a mile off. There&rsquo;s a couple lurching around backstage. Anyone can see <span class="italic">they&rsquo;re</span> policemen. You don&rsquo;t look like one.&rdquo; She turned the badge over and over in her hands. &ldquo;I ain&rsquo;t happy with the idea of <span class="italic">secret</span> policemen,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Why do you need secret policemen?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Because,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;, &ldquo;sometimes you have secret criminals.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny almost smiled. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s a fact,&rdquo; she said. She peered at the small engraving on the back of the badge. &ldquo;Says here &lsquo;Cable Street Particulars&rsquo;&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There aren&rsquo;t many of us,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve only just started. Commander Vimes said that, since we can&rsquo;t do anything about the Thieves&rsquo; Guild and the Assassins&rsquo; Guild, we&rsquo;d better look for other crimes. Hidden crimes. That need Watchmen with&hellip;different skills. And I can play the piano quite well&hellip;&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page310"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What kind of skills have that troll and that dwarf got?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Seems to me the only thing they&rsquo;re really good at is standing around looking obvious and stupi&mdash;Hah! Yes&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Right. And they didn&rsquo;t even need much training,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;Commander Vimes says they&rsquo;re the most obvious policemen anyone could think of. Incidentally, Corporal Nobbs has got some papers to prove he&rsquo;s a human being.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Forged?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think so.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny Weatherwax put her head on one side. &ldquo;If your house was on fire, what&rsquo;s the first thing you&rsquo;d take out of it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, Granny&mdash;&rdquo; Agnes began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hmm. Who set fire to it?&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re a policeman, right enough.&rdquo; Granny handed him his badge. &ldquo;You come to arrest poor Walter?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I know he didn&rsquo;t murder Dr. Undershaft. I was watching him. He was trying to unblock the privies all afternoon&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve had proof that Walter <span class="italic">isn&rsquo;t</span> the Ghost,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I was almost sure it was Salzella,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;I know he creeps off to the cellars sometimes and I&rsquo;m sure he&rsquo;s stealing money. But the Ghost has been seen when Salzella is perfectly visible. So now I think&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Think? Think?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Someone thinking around here at last? How&rsquo;d you recognize the Ghost, Mister Policeman?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well&hellip;he&rsquo;s got a mask on&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really? Now say it again, and <span class="italic">listen</span> to what <a id="page311"></a>you say. Good grief! You can <span class="italic">recognize</span> him because he&rsquo;s got a <span class="italic">mask</span> on? You recognize him <span class="italic">because</span> you don&rsquo;t know who he is? Life isn&rsquo;t neat! Whoever said there&rsquo;s only one Ghost?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The figure ran through the shadows of the fly loft, cloak billowing around it. Nanny Ogg was outlined against the light, peering down.</p>

<p class="para">She said, without turning her head: &ldquo;Hello, Mr. Ghost. Come back for your saw, have you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Then she darted around behind the cable until she faced the shadow. &ldquo;Millions of people knows I&rsquo;m up here! You wouldn&rsquo;t hurt a little old lady, would you? Oh, dear&hellip;me poor old heart!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She keeled over backward, hitting the floor hard enough to make the cable swing.</p>

<p class="para">The figure hesitated. Then it took a length of thin rope from a pocket and advanced cautiously toward the fallen witch. It knelt down, wound an end of the rope around each hand, and leaned forward.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny&rsquo;s knee came up sharply.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Feels a lot better now, mister,&rdquo; she said, as he reared backward.</p>

<p class="para">She scrambled up again and grabbed the saw.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Come back to finish it, eh?&rdquo; she said, waving the implement in the air. &ldquo;Wonder how you&rsquo;d blame <span class="italic">that</span> on Walter! Make you happy, would it, the whole place burning down?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The figure, moving awkwardly, backed away as she advanced. Then it turned, lurched along the wobbling catwalk and disappeared into the gloom.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny pounded after him and saw the figure <a id="page312"></a>climbing down a ladder. She looked around quickly, grabbed a rope to slide after him, and heard a pulley somewhere above start to clatter.</p>

<p class="para">She descended, skirts billowing around her. When she was about halfway down, a bunch of sandbags went upward past her in a hurry.</p>

<p class="para">As she rattled onward she saw, between her boots, someone struggling with the trapdoor to the cellars.</p>

<p class="para">She landed a few feet away, still holding the rope.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Salzella?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny stuck two fingers in her mouth and let out a whistle that could have melted earwax.</p>

<p class="para">She let go of the rope.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella glanced up at her as he raised the trapdoor, and then saw the shape dropping out of the roof.</p>

<p class="para">One hundred and eighty pounds of sandbag hit the door, slamming it shut.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Watch out!&rdquo; said Nanny, cheerfully.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Bucket waited nervously in the wings. Unnecessarily nervously, of course. The Ghost was dead. There couldn&rsquo;t be anything to worry about. People said they&rsquo;d <span class="italic">seen</span> him killed, although they were, Bucket had to admit, a bit hazy on the actual details.</p>

<p class="para">Nothing to worry about.</p>

<p class="para">Not a thing.</p>

<p class="para">Nothing whatsoever in any way.</p>

<p class="para">Everything was absolutely nothing to worry about in any way.</p>

<p class="para">He ran a finger around the inside of his collar. It hadn&rsquo;t been such a bad life in wholesale cheese. <a id="page313"></a>The most you had to worry about was one of poor old Reg Plenty&rsquo;s trouser buttons in the Farmhouse Nutty and the time young Weevins minced his thumb in the stirring machine and it was only by luck they happened to be doing strawberry yogurt at the time&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">A figure loomed up beside him. He clutched at a curtain for support and then turned to see, with relief, the majestic and reassuring stomach of Enrico Basilica. The tenor looked magnificent in a huge cockerel costume, complete with giant beak, wattles and comb.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah, se&ntilde;or,&rdquo; Bucket burbled. &ldquo;Very impressive, may I say.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Si,&rdquo; said a muffled voice from somewhere behind the beak, as other members of the company hurried past onto the stage.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;May I say how sorry I am about all that business earlier. I can assure you that it doesn&rsquo;t happen every night, ahahah&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Si?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Probably just high spirits, ahaha&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The beak turned toward him. Bucket backed away.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Si!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;yes&hellip;well, I&rsquo;m glad you&rsquo;re so understanding&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Temperamental, he thought, as the tenor strode onto the stage and the overture to Act Three drifted to its close. They&rsquo;re like that, the real <span class="italic">artistes</span>. Nerves stretched like rubber bands, I expect. It&rsquo;s just like waiting for the cheese, really. You can get really edgy waiting to see whether you&rsquo;ve got half a ton of best blue-vein or just a vat <a id="page314"></a>full of pig food. It&rsquo;s probably like that when you&rsquo;ve got an aria working its way up&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;d he go? Where&rsquo;d he go?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What? Oh&hellip;Mrs. Ogg&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The old woman waved a saw in front of his face. It was not, in Mr. Bucket&rsquo;s current state of mental tension, a helpful gesture.</p>

<p class="para">He was suddenly surrounded by other figures, equally conducive to multiple exclamation marks.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Perdita? Why aren&rsquo;t you onstage&hellip;oh, Lady Esmerelda, I didn&rsquo;t see you there, of course if you want to come backstage you only have to&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;s Salzella?&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;.</p>

<p class="para">Bucket looked around vaguely. &ldquo;He was here a few minutes ago&hellip;That is,&rdquo; he said, pulling himself together, &ldquo;<span class="italic">Mr</span>. Salzella is probably attending to his duties somewhere which, young man, is more than I can say for&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I demand you stop the show <span class="italic">now</span>,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, you do, do you? And by what authority, may I ask?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s been sawing through the rope!&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; pulled out a badge. &ldquo;This!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket looked closely. &ldquo;&lsquo;Ankh-Morpork Guild of Musicians member 1244&rsquo;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; glared at him, then at the badge, and started to pat his pockets urgently. &ldquo;No! Blast, I know I had the other one a moment ago&hellip;Look, you&rsquo;ve got to clear the theater, we&rsquo;ve got to search it, and that means&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t stop the show,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I won&rsquo;t stop the show,&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;Cos I reckon he&rsquo;d like to see the show stopped. <a id="page315"></a>The show must go on, eh? Isn&rsquo;t that what you believe? Could he have got out of the building?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I sent Corporal Nobbs to the stage door and Sergeant Detritus is in the foyer,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;When it comes to standing in doorways, they&rsquo;re among the best.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Excuse me, what&rsquo;s happening?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He could be anywhere!&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;There&rsquo;re hundreds of hiding places!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How about these cellars everyone talks about?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There&rsquo;s only one entrance,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s not stupid.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He can&rsquo;t get into the cellars,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;He ran off! Probably in a cupboard somewhere by now!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, he&rsquo;ll stay where there&rsquo;s crowds,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what I&rsquo;d do.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Could he have got into the audience from here?&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">Granny jerked a thumb toward the stage. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s somewhere on there. I can <span class="italic">feel</span> him.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then we&rsquo;ll wait until he comes off!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Eighty people coming offstage all at once?&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you know what it&rsquo;s <span class="italic">like</span> when the curtain goes down?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And we don&rsquo;t want to stop the show,&rdquo; Granny mused.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, we don&rsquo;t want to stop the show,&rdquo; said Bucket, grasping at a familiar idea as it swept by on <a id="page316"></a>a tide of incomprehensibility. &ldquo;Or give people their money back in any fashion whatsoever. What are we talking about, does anyone know?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The show must go on&hellip;&rdquo; murmured Granny Weatherwax, still staring out of the wings. &ldquo;Things have to end right. This is an opera house. They should end&hellip;operatically&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg hopped up and down excitedly. &ldquo;Oo, I know what you&rsquo;re thinking, Esme!&rdquo; she squeaked. &ldquo;Oo, yes! Can we? Just so&rsquo;s I can say I done it! Eh? Can we? Go on! Let&rsquo;s!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Henry Lawsy peered closely at his opera notes. He had not, of course, fully understood the events of the first two acts, but knew that this was perfectly okay because one would have to be quite na&iuml;ve to expect good sense as well as good songs. Anyway, it would all be explained in the last act, which was the Masked Ball in the Duke&rsquo;s Palace. It would almost certainly turn out that the woman one of the men had been rather daringly courting would be his own wife, but so cunningly disguised by a very small mask that her husband wouldn&rsquo;t have spotted that she wore the same clothes and had the same hairstyle. Someone&rsquo;s serving man would turn out to be someone else&rsquo;s daughter in disguise; someone would die of something that didn&rsquo;t prevent them from singing about it for several minutes; and the plot would be resolved by some coincidences which, in real life, would be as likely as a cardboard hammer.</p>

<p class="para">He didn&rsquo;t know any of this for a fact. He was making a calculated guess.</p>
<a id="page317"></a>

<p class="para">In the meantime Act Three opened with the traditional ballet, this time apparently a country dance by the Maidens of the Court.</p>

<p class="para">Henry was aware of muffled laughter around him.</p>

<p class="para">This was because, if you ran an eye at head-height along the row of ballerinas as they tripped, arm in arm, onto the stage, there was an apparent gap.</p>

<p class="para">This was only filled if the gaze went downward a foot or two, to a small fat ballerina in a huge grin, an overstretched tutu, long white drawers and&hellip;boots.</p>

<p class="para">Henry stared. They were <span class="italic">big</span> boots. They moved back and forth at an astonishing speed. The satin slippers of the other dancers twinkled as they drifted across the floor, but the boots flashed and clattered like a tap dancer afraid of falling into the sink.</p>

<p class="para">The pirouettes were novel, too. While the other dancers whirled like snowflakes, the little fat one spun like a top and moved across the floor like one, too, bits of her anatomy trying to achieve local orbit.</p>

<p class="para">Around Henry members of the audience were whispering to one another.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh yes,&rdquo; he heard someone declare, &ldquo;they tried this in Pseudopolis&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">His mother nudged him. &ldquo;This supposed to happen?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;I don&rsquo;t think so&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&rsquo;S bloody good, though! A good laugh!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">As the fat ballerina collided with a donkey in evening dress she staggered and grabbed at his mask, which came off&hellip;</p>
<a id="page318"></a>

<p class="para">Herr Trubelmacher, the conductor, froze in horror and astonishment. Around him the orchestra rattled to a standstill, except for the tuba player&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;oom-BAH-oom-BAH-oom-BAH&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;who had memorized his score years ago and never took much interest in current affairs.</p>

<p class="para">Two figures rose up right in front of Trubelmacher. A hand grabbed his baton.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry, sir,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;, &ldquo;but the show must go on, yes?&rdquo; He handed the stick to the other figure.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There you are,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And <span class="italic">don&rsquo;t let them stop</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ook!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The Librarian carefully lifted Herr Trubelmacher aside with one hand, licked the baton thoughtfully, and then focused his gaze on the tuba player.</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;oom-BAH-oom-BAHhhh&hellip;oom&hellip;om&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">The tuba player tapped a trombonist on the shoulder.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hey, Frank, there&rsquo;s a monkey where old troublemaker should be&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shutupshutupshutup!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Satisfied, the orangutan raised his arms.</p>

<p class="para">The orchestra looked up. And then looked up a bit more. No conductor in musical history, not even the one who once fried and ate the piccolo player&rsquo;s liver on a cymbal for one wrong note too many, not even the one who skewered three troublesome violinists on his baton, not even the one who made really <span class="italic">hurtful</span> sarcastic remarks in a loud voice, was ever the focus of such reverential attention.</p>

<p class="para">Onstage, Nanny Ogg took advantage of the hush to pull the head off a frog.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Madam!&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page319"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry, thought you might be someone else&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The long arms dropped. The orchestra, in one huge muddled chord, slammed back into life.</p>

<p class="para">The dancers, after a moment&rsquo;s confusion during which Nanny Ogg took the opportunity to decapitate a clown and a phoenix, tried to continue.</p>

<p class="para">The chorus watched in bemusement.</p>

<p class="para">Christine felt a tap on her shoulder, and turned to see Agnes. &ldquo;Perdita! Where have you been!?&rdquo; she hissed. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s nearly time for my duet with Enrico!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;ve got to help!&rdquo; hissed Agnes. But down in her soul Perdita said: Enrico, eh? It&rsquo;s Se&ntilde;or Basilica to everyone else&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Help you what!?&rdquo; said Christine.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Take everyone&rsquo;s masks off!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Christine&rsquo;s forehead wrinkled beautifully. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s not supposed to happen until the end of the opera, is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;it&rsquo;s all been changed!&rdquo; said Agnes urgently. She turned to a nobleman in a zebra mask and tugged it desperately. The singer underneath glared at her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry!&rdquo; she whispered. &ldquo;I thought you were someone else!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;re not supposed to take them off until the end!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s been changed!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Has it? No one told me!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A short-necked giraffe next to him leaned sideways. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s that?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The big unmasking scene is now, apparently!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No one told <span class="italic">me</span>!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, but when does anyone ever tell us anything? <span class="italic">We&rsquo;re</span> only the chorus&hellip;here, why is old <a id="page320"></a>Troublemaker wearing a monkey mask&hellip;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg pirouetted past, cannoned into an elephant in evening dress and beheaded him by the trunk. She whispered: &ldquo;We&rsquo;re looking for the Ghost, see?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But&hellip;the Ghost is dead, isn&rsquo;t he?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hard things to kill, ghosts,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">The whisper spread outward from that point. There is nothing like a chorus for rumor. People who would not believe a High Priest if he said the sky was blue, and was able to produce signed affidavits to this effect from his white-haired old mother and three Vestal virgins, would trust just about anything whispered darkly behind their hand by a complete stranger in a pub.</p>

<p class="para">A cockatoo spun around and pulled the mask off a parrot&hellip;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Bucket sobbed. This was worse than the day the buttermilk exploded. This was worse than the flash heatwave that had led a whole warehouseful of Lancre Extra Strong to riot.</p>

<p class="para">The opera had turned into a <span class="italic">pantomime</span>.</p>

<p class="para">The audience was <span class="italic">laughing</span>.</p>

<p class="para">About the only character still with a mask on was Se&ntilde;or Basilica, who was watching the struggling chorus with as much aloof amazement as his own mask could convey&mdash;and this, amazingly enough, was quite a lot.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, no&hellip;&rdquo; moaned Bucket. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll never live it down! He&rsquo;ll never come back! It&rsquo;ll be all over the opera circuit and no one will ever want to come here ever again!&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page321"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ever again wha&rsquo;?&rdquo; mumbled a voice behind him.</p>

<p class="para">Bucket turned. &ldquo;Oh, Se&ntilde;or Basilica,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Didn&rsquo;t see you there&hellip;I was just thinking, I do hope you don&rsquo;t think this is typical!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Se&ntilde;or Basilica stared through him, swaying slightly from side to side. He was wearing a torn shirt.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Summon&hellip;&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Summon&hellip;summon hit me onna head,&rdquo; said the tenor. &ldquo;Wanna glassa water pliss&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But you&rsquo;re&hellip;just about&hellip;to&hellip;sing&hellip;aren&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; said Bucket. He grabbed the stunned man by the collar to pull him closer, but this simply meant that he dragged himself off the floor, bringing his shoes about level with Basilica&rsquo;s knees. &ldquo;Tell me&hellip;you&rsquo;re out there&hellip;on the stage&hellip;please!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Even in his stunned state, Enrico Basilica a.k.a. Henry Slugg recognized what might be called the essential dichotomy of the statement. He stuck to what he knew.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Summon bashed me inna corridor&hellip;&rdquo; he volunteered.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s not you out there?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Basilica blinked heavily. &ldquo;&rsquo;M not me?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re going to sing the famous duet in a moment!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Another thought staggered through Basilica&rsquo;s abused skull. &ldquo;&rsquo;M I?&rdquo; he said &ldquo;&rsquo;S good&hellip;&rsquo;ll look forwa&rsquo; to that. Ne&rsquo;er had a chance to hear me befo&rsquo;&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He gave a happy little sigh and fell full-length backward.</p>
<a id="page322"></a>

<p class="para">Bucket leaned against a pillar for support. Then his brow furrowed and, in the best traditions of the extended double take, he stared at the fallen tenor and counted to one on his fingers. Then he turned toward the stage and counted to two.</p>

<p class="para">He could feel a fourth exclamation mark coming on any time now.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The Enrico Basilica onstage turned his mask this way and that. Stage right, Bucket was whispering to a group of stagehands. Stage left, Andr&eacute; the secret pianist was waiting. A large troll loomed next to him.</p>

<p class="para">The fat red singer walked to center stage as the prelude to the duet began. The audience settled down again. Fun and games among the chorus was all very well&mdash;it might even be in the plot&mdash;but this was what they&rsquo;d paid for. This was what it was all about.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes stared at him as Christine walked toward him. Now she could see he wasn&rsquo;t right. Oh, he was fat, in a pillow-up-your-shirt sort of way, but he didn&rsquo;t move like Basilica. Basilica moved lightly on his feet, as fat men often do, giving the effect of a barely tethered balloon.</p>

<p class="para">She glanced at Nanny, who was also watching him carefully. She couldn&rsquo;t see Granny Weatherwax anywhere. That probably meant she was really close.</p>

<p class="para">The expectancy of the audience dragged at them all. Ears opened like petals. The fourth wall of the stage, the big black sucking darkness outside, was a well of silence begging to be filled up.</p>
<a id="page323"></a>

<p class="para">Christine was walking toward him quite unconcerned. Christine would walk into a dragon&rsquo;s mouth if it had a sign on it saying &ldquo;Totally harmless, I promise you&rdquo;&hellip;at least, if it was printed in large, easy-to-understand letters.</p>

<p class="para">No one seemed to want to <span class="italic">do</span> anything.</p>

<p class="para">It <span class="italic">was</span> a famous duet. And a beautiful one. Agnes ought to know. She&rsquo;d been singing it all last night.</p>

<p class="para">Christine took the false Basilica&rsquo;s hand and, as the opening bars of the duet began, opened her mouth&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Stop right there!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes put everything she could into it. The chandelier tinkled.</p>

<p class="para">The orchestra went silent in a skid of wheezes and twangs.</p>

<p class="para">In a fading of chords and a dying of echoes, the show stopped.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Walter Plinge sat in the candlelit gloom under the stage, his hands resting on his lap. It was not often that Walter Plinge had nothing to do, but, when he did have nothing to do, he did nothing.</p>

<p class="para">He liked it down here. It was familiar. The sounds of the opera filtered through. They were muffled, but that didn&rsquo;t matter. Walter knew all the words, every note of music, every step of every dance. He needed the actual performances only in the same way that a clock needs its tiny little escapement mechanism; it kept him ticking nicely.</p>

<p class="para">Mrs. Plinge had taught him to read using the old programs. That&rsquo;s how he knew he was part of it all. <a id="page324"></a>But he knew that anyway. He&rsquo;d cut what teeth he had on a helmet with horns on it. The first bed he could remember was the very same trampoline used by Dame Gigli in the infamous Bouncing Gigli incident.</p>

<p class="para">Walter Plinge lived opera. He breathed its songs, painted its scenery, lit its fires, washed its floors and shined its shoes. Opera filled up places in Walter Plinge that might otherwise have been empty.</p>

<p class="para">And now the show had stopped.</p>

<p class="para">But all the energy, all the raw pent-up emotion that is dammed up behind a show&mdash;all the screaming, the fears, the hopes, the desires&mdash;flew on, like a body hurled from the wreckage.</p>

<p class="para">The terrible momentum smashed into Walter Plinge like a tidal wave hitting a teacup.</p>

<p class="para">It propelled him out of his chair and flung him against the crumbling scenery.</p>

<p class="para">He slid down and rolled into a twitching heap on the floor, clapping his hands over his ears to shut out the sudden, unnatural silence.</p>

<p class="para">A shape stepped out of the shadows.</p>

<p class="para">Granny Weatherwax had never heard of psychiatry and would have had no truck with it even if she had. There are some arts too black even for a witch. She practiced headology&mdash;practiced, in fact, until she was very good at it. And though there may be some superficial similarities between a psychiatrist and a headologist, there is a huge practical difference. A psychiatrist, dealing with a man who fears he is being followed by a large and terrible monster, will endeavor to convince him that monsters don&rsquo;t exist. Granny Weatherwax would simply give him a chair to stand on and a very heavy stick.</p>
<a id="page325"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Stand up, Walter Plinge,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">Walter stood up, staring straight ahead of him. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s stopped! It&rsquo;s stopped! It&rsquo;s <span class="italic">bad luck</span> to stop the show!&rdquo; he said hoarsely.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Someone better start it again,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You can&rsquo;t stop the show! It&rsquo;s the <span class="italic">show!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. Someone better start it again, Walter Plinge.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter didn&rsquo;t appear to notice her. He pawed aimlessly through his stack of music and ran his hands through the drifts of old programs. One hand touched the keyboard of the harmonium and played a few neurotic notes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Wrong to stop. Show must go on&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mr. Salzella is trying to stop the show, isn&rsquo;t he, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter&rsquo;s head shot up. He stared straight ahead of him.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You haven&rsquo;t seen anything, Walter Plinge!&rdquo; he said, in a voice so like Salzella&rsquo;s that even Granny raised an eyebrow. &ldquo;And if you tell lies, you will be locked up and I&rsquo;ll see to it that there&rsquo;s big trouble for your mother!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny nodded.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He found out about the Ghost, didn&rsquo;t he?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;The Ghost who comes out when he has a mask on&hellip;doesn&rsquo;t he, Walter Plinge? And the man thought: I can use that. And when it&rsquo;s time for the Ghost to be caught&hellip;well, there <span class="italic">is</span> a Ghost that can be caught. And the <span class="italic">best</span> thing is that everyone will believe it. They&rsquo;ll feel bad about themselves, maybe, but they&rsquo;ll believe it. Even Walter Plinge won&rsquo;t be certain, &rsquo;cos his mind&rsquo;s all tangled up.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page326"></a>

<p class="para">Granny took a deep breath. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s tangled, but it <span class="italic">ain&rsquo;t</span> twisted.&rdquo; There was a sigh. &ldquo;Well, matters will have to resolve themselves. There&rsquo;s nothing else for it.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She removed her hat and fished around in the point. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t mind tellin&rsquo; you this, Walter,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;because you won&rsquo;t understand and you won&rsquo;t remember. There was a wicked ole witch once called Black Aliss. She was an unholy terror. There&rsquo;s never been one worse or more powerful. Until now. Because I could spit in her eye and steal her teeth, see. Because she didn&rsquo;t know Right from Wrong, so she got all twisted up and that was the end of her.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The trouble is, you see, that if you <span class="italic">do</span> know Right from Wrong you can&rsquo;t choose Wrong. You just can&rsquo;t do it and live. So&hellip;if I was a bad witch I could make Mister Salzella&rsquo;s muscles turn against his bones and break them where he stood&hellip;if I was bad. I could do things inside his head, change the shape he thinks he is, and he&rsquo;d be down on what&rsquo;d been his knees and <span class="italic">begging</span> to be turned into a frog&hellip;if I was bad. I could leave him with a mind like a scrambled egg, listening to colors and hearing smells&hellip;if I was bad. Oh, yes.&rdquo; There was another sigh, deeper and more heartfelt. &ldquo;But I can&rsquo;t do none of that stuff. That wouldn&rsquo;t be Right.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She gave a deprecating little chuckle. And if Nanny Ogg had been listening, she would have resolved as follows: that no maddened cackle from Black Aliss of infamous memory, no evil little giggle from some crazed vampyre whose morals were worse than his spelling, no side-splitting guffaw from the most inventive torturer, was quite so <a id="page327"></a>unnerving as a happy little chuckle from a Granny Weatherwax about to do what&rsquo;s best.</p>

<p class="para">From the point of her hat Granny withdrew a paper-thin mask. It was a simple face&mdash;smooth, white, basic. There were semicircular holes for the eyes. It was neither happy nor sad.</p>

<p class="para">She turned it over in her hands. Walter seemed to stop breathing.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Simple thing, ain&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Looks beautiful, but it&rsquo;s really just a simple bit of stuff, just like any other mask. Wizards could poke at this for a year and still say there was nothing magic about it, eh? Which just shows how much <span class="italic">they</span> know, Walter Plinge.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She tossed it to him. He caught it hungrily and pulled it over his face.</p>

<p class="para">Then he stood up in one flowing movement, moving like a dancer.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what you are when you&rsquo;re behind the mask,&rdquo; said Granny, &ldquo;but &lsquo;ghost&rsquo; is just another word for &lsquo;spirit&rsquo; and &lsquo;spirit&rsquo; is just another word for &lsquo;soul.&rsquo; Off you go, Walter Plinge.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The masked figure did not move.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I meant&hellip;off you go, Ghost. The show <span class="italic">must</span> go on.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The mask nodded, and darted away.</p>

<p class="para">Granny slapped her hands together like the crack of doom.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Right! Let&rsquo;s do some good!&rdquo; she said, to the universe at large.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Everyone was looking at her.</p>

<p class="para">This was a moment in time, a little point <a id="page328"></a>between the past and future, when a second could stretch out and out&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes felt the blush begin. It was heading for her face like the revenge of the volcano god. When it got there, she knew, it would be all over for her.</p>

<p class="para">You&rsquo;ll apologize, Perdita jeered.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shut up!&rdquo; shouted Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">She strode forward before the echo had had time to come back from the farther ends of the auditorium, and wrenched at the red mask.</p>

<p class="para">The entire chorus came in on cue. This was opera, after all. The show had stopped, but opera continued&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Salzella!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He grabbed Agnes, clamping his hand over her mouth. His other hand flew to his belt and drew his sword.</p>

<p class="para">It wasn&rsquo;t a stage prop. The blade hissed through the air as he spun to face the chorus.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh <span class="italic">dear</span> oh <span class="italic">dear</span> oh <span class="italic">dear</span>,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;How extremely <span class="italic">operatic</span> of me. And now, I fear, I shall have to take this poor girl hostage. It&rsquo;s the appropriate thing to do, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He looked around triumphantly. The audience watched in fascinated silence.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t anyone going to say &lsquo;You won&rsquo;t get away with this&rsquo;?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You won&rsquo;t get away with this,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;, from the wings.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You have the place surrounded, I have no doubt?&rdquo; said Salzella brightly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, we have the place surrounded.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Christine screamed and fainted.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella smiled even more brightly.</p>
<a id="page329"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah, now <span class="italic">there&rsquo;s</span> someone operatic!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But, you see, I <span class="italic">am</span> going to get away with it, because I <span class="italic">don&rsquo;t</span> think operatically. Myself and this young lady here are going to go down to the cellars where I may, possibly, leave her unharmed. I doubt very much that you have the cellars surrounded. Even I don&rsquo;t know everywhere they go, and believe me my knowledge is really rather extensive&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He paused. Agnes tried to break free, but his grip tightened around her neck.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;By now,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;someone should have said: &lsquo;But <span class="italic">why</span>, Salzella?&rsquo; Honestly, do I have to do <span class="italic">everything</span> around here?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket realized he had his mouth open. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what I was <span class="italic">going</span> to say!&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah, good. Well, in that case, I should say something like: Because I wanted to. Because I rather like money, you see. But more than that&rdquo;&mdash;he took a deep breath&mdash;&ldquo;I really hate opera. I don&rsquo;t want to get needlessly excited about this, but opera, I am afraid, really is dreadful. And I have had <span class="italic">enough</span>. So, while I have the stage, let me tell you what a wretched, self-adoring, totally unrealistic, worthless art form it is, what a terrible waste of fine music, what a&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a whirr off on one side of the stage. The skirts of costumes began to flap. Dust flew up.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; looked around. Beside him, the wind machine had started up. The handle was turning by itself.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella turned to see what everyone was staring at.</p>

<p class="para">The Ghost had dropped lightly onto the stage. His opera cloak billowed around him&hellip;operatically.</p>
<a id="page330"></a>

<p class="para">He bowed slightly, and drew his sword.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But you&rsquo;re dea&mdash;&rdquo; Salzella began. &ldquo;Oh, <span class="italic">yes!</span> A ghost of a Ghost! Totally unbelievable and an offense against common sense, in the best operatic tradition! This was really too much to hope for!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He thrust Agnes away, and nodded happily.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s what opera does to a man,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It rots the brain, you see, and I doubt whether he had too much of that to begin with. It drives people mad. Mad, d&rsquo;you hear me, mad!! Ahem. They act irrationally. Don&rsquo;t you think I&rsquo;ve watched you, over the years? It&rsquo;s like a hothouse for insanity!! D&rsquo;you hear me? Insanity!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He and the Ghost began to circle one another.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t know what it has been like, I assure you, being the only sane man in this madhouse!! You believe <span class="italic">anything</span>!! You&rsquo;d prefer to believe a ghost can be in two places at once than that there might simply be two people!! Even Pounder thought he could blackmail me!! Poking around in places that he shouldn&rsquo;t!! Well, of course, I <span class="italic">had</span> to kill him for his own good. This place sends even rat catchers mad!! And Undershaft&hellip;well, why couldn&rsquo;t he have forgotten his glasses like he usually did, eh?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He lashed out with his sword. The Ghost parried.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And now I&rsquo;ll fight your Ghost,&rdquo; he said, moving forward in a flurry of strokes, &ldquo;and you&rsquo;ll notice that our Ghost here doesn&rsquo;t actually know how to fence&hellip;because he only knows stage fencing, you see&hellip;where the whole point, of course, is simply to hit the other fellow&rsquo;s sword with a suitably impressive metallic noise&hellip;so that you can die <a id="page331"></a>very dramatically merely because he&rsquo;s carefully thrust his sword under your armpit&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The Ghost was forced to retreat under the onslaught, until he fell backward over the unconscious body of Christine.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;See?&rdquo; said Salzella. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what comes of believing in opera!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He reached down quickly and tugged the mask off Walter Plinge&rsquo;s face.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Really, Walter!!! You <span class="italic">are</span> a bad boy!!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry Mr. Salzella!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Look how everyone&rsquo;s staring!!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry Mr. Salzella!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The mask crumpled in Salzella&rsquo;s fingers. He let the fragments tumble to the floor. Then he pulled Walter to his feet.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;See, company? <span class="italic">This</span> is your luck!!! <span class="italic">This</span> is your Ghost!!! Without his mask he&rsquo;s just an idiot who can hardly tie his shoelaces!!! Ahahaha!!!! Ahem. It&rsquo;s all your fault, Walter Plinge&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mr. Salzella!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">No</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella looked around.</p>

<p class="para">A voice said, &ldquo;<span class="italic">No one would believe Walter Plinge. Even Walter Plinge gets confused about the things Walter Plinge sees. Even his mother was afraid he might have murdered people. People could accept just about anything of a Walter Plinge</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a steady tapping noise.</p>

<p class="para">The trapdoor opened beside Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">A pointy hat appeared slowly, followed by the rest of Granny Weatherwax, with her arms folded. She glared at Salzella as the floor clicked into place. Her foot stopped tapping on the boards.</p>
<a id="page332"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, well,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Lady Esmerelda, eh?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;m stoppin&rsquo; bein&rsquo; a lady, Mr. Salzella.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He glanced up at the pointy hat. &ldquo;So you are a witch instead?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;A bad witch, no doubt?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Worse.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But <span class="italic">this</span>,&rdquo; said Salzella, &ldquo;is a sword. Everyone knows witches can&rsquo;t magic iron and steel. Get out of my way!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The sword hissed down.</p>

<p class="para">Granny thrust out her hand. There was a blur of flesh and steel and&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">&hellip;she held the sword, by the blade.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Tell you what, Mr. Salzella,&rdquo; she said, levelly, &ldquo;it <span class="italic">ought</span> to be Walter Plinge who finishes this, eh? It&rsquo;s him you harmed, apart from the ones you murdered, o&rsquo; course. You didn&rsquo;t need to do that. But you wore a mask, didn&rsquo;t you? There&rsquo;s a kind of magic in masks. Masks conceal one face, but they reveal another. The one that only comes out in darkness. I bet you could do just what you <span class="italic">liked</span>, behind a mask&hellip;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella blinked at her. He pulled on his sword, tugged hard on a sharp blade held in an unprotected hand.</p>

<p class="para">There was a groan from several members of the chorus. Granny grinned. Her knuckles whitened as she redoubled her grip.</p>

<p class="para">She turned her head toward Walter Plinge. &ldquo;Put your mask on, Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Everyone looked down at the crumpled cardboard on the stage.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t have one anymore Mistress Weatherwax!&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page333"></a>

<p class="para">Granny followed his gaze. &ldquo;Oh deary, deary me,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Well, I can see we shall have to do something about that. Look at me, Walter.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He did as he was told. Granny&rsquo;s eyes half-closed. &ldquo;You&hellip;trust <span class="italic">Perdita</span>, don&rsquo;t you, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mistress Weatherwax!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s good, because she&rsquo;s got a new mask for you, Walter Plinge. A magic one. It&rsquo;s just like your old one, d&rsquo;you see, only you wear it under your skin and you don&rsquo;t have to take it off and no one but you will ever need to know it&rsquo;s there. Got it, Perdita?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But I&mdash;&rdquo; Agnes began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Got it?</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;oh, yes. Here it is. Yes. I&rsquo;ve got it in my hand.&rdquo; She waved an empty hand vaguely.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You&rsquo;re holding it the wrong way up, my girl!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh. Sorry.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well? Give it to him, then.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er. Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes advanced on Walter.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Now you take it, Walter,&rdquo; said Granny, still gripping the sword.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes Mistress Weatherwax&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He reached out toward Agnes. As he did so, she was sure that, just for a moment, there was a faint pressure on her fingertips.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Well?</span> Put it on!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter looked uncertain.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You do <span class="italic">believe</span> there&rsquo;s a mask there, don&rsquo;t you, Walter?&rdquo; Granny demanded. &ldquo;Perdita&rsquo;s sensible and <span class="italic">she</span> knows an invisible mask when she sees one.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He nodded, slowly, and raised his hands to his face.</p>

<p class="para">And Agnes was sure that he&rsquo;d somehow come <a id="page334"></a>into focus. Almost certainly nothing had happened that could be measured with any kind of instrument, any more than you could weigh an idea or sell good fortune by the yard. But Walter stood up, smiling faintly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good,&rdquo; said Granny. She stared at Salzella.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I reckon you two should fight again,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But it can&rsquo;t be said I&rsquo;m unfair. I expect <span class="italic">you&rsquo;ve</span> got a Ghost mask somewhere? Mrs. Ogg saw you waving it, see. And she&rsquo;s not as gormless as she looks&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Thank you,&rdquo; said a fat ballerina.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;so she thought, how could people still say afterward that they&rsquo;d seen the Ghost? &rsquo;Cos that&rsquo;s how you recognize the Ghost, by his mask. So there&rsquo;s <span class="italic">two</span> masks.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Under her gaze, telling himself that he could resist any time he wanted to, Salzella reached into his jacket and produced his own mask.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Put it on, then.&rdquo; She let go of the sword. &ldquo;Then who <span class="italic">you</span> are can fight who <span class="italic">he</span> is.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Down in the pit, the percussionist stared as his sticks rose and began a drum roll.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Are you doing that, Gytha?&rdquo; said Granny Weatherwax.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I thought <span class="italic">you</span> were.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s opera, then. The show must go on.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter Plinge raised his sword. The masked Salzella glanced from him to Granny, and then lunged.</p>

<p class="para">The swords met.</p>

<p class="para">It was, Agnes realized, stage-fighting. The swords clashed and rattled as the fighters danced back and forth across the stage. Walter wasn&rsquo;t trying to hit Salzella. Every thrust was parried. Every opportunity <a id="page335"></a>to strike back, as the director of music grew more angry, was ignored.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This isn&rsquo;t fighting!&rdquo; Salzella shouted, standing back. &ldquo;This is&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter thrust.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella staggered away, until he cannoned into Nanny Ogg. He lurched sideways. Then he staggered forward, dropped onto one knee, got unsteadily to his feet again, and staggered into the center of the stage.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Whatever happens,&rdquo; he gasped, wrenching off his mask, &ldquo;it can&rsquo;t be worse than a season of opera!!!! I don&rsquo;t mind where I&rsquo;m going so long as there are no fat men pretending to be thin boys, and no huge long songs which everyone says are so beautiful just because they don&rsquo;t understand what the hell they&rsquo;re actually about!!!! Ah&mdash;Ah-argh&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He slumped to the floor.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But Walter didn&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo; Agnes began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shut up,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg, out of the corner of her mouth.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But he <span class="italic">hasn&rsquo;t&mdash;</span>&rdquo; Bucket began.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Incidentally, <span class="italic">another</span> thing I can&rsquo;t stand about opera,&rdquo; said Salzella, rising to his feet and reeling crabwise toward the curtains, &ldquo;are the plots. They make no sense!! And no one ever says so!!! And the quality of the acting? It&rsquo;s nonexistent!! Everyone stands around watching the person who&rsquo;s singing. Ye gods, it&rsquo;s going to be a relief to put that behind&hellip;ah&hellip;argh&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He slumped to the floor.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Is that it?&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shouldn&rsquo;t think so,&rdquo; said Granny Weatherwax.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;As for the people who attend opera,&rdquo; said <a id="page336"></a>Salzella, struggling upright again and staggering sideways, &ldquo;I think I just possibly hate them even worse!!! They&rsquo;re so <span class="italic">ignorant</span>!!! There&rsquo;s hardly a one of them out there who knows the first thing about music!!! They go on about <span class="italic">tunes</span>!!! They spend all day endeavoring to be sensible human beings, and then they walk in here and they leave their intelligence on a nail by the door&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then why didn&rsquo;t you just leave?&rdquo; snapped Agnes. &ldquo;If you&rsquo;d stolen all this money why didn&rsquo;t you just go away somewhere, if you hated it so much?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Salzella stared at her while swaying back and forth. His mouth opened and shut once or twice, as if he were trying out unfamiliar words.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Leave?&rdquo; he managed. &ldquo;<span class="italic">Leave?</span> Leave the <span class="italic">opera?</span>&hellip;Argh argh argh&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He hit the floor again.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; prodded the fallen director. &ldquo;Is he dead yet?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How can he be dead?&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;Good grief, can&rsquo;t anyone see that&mdash;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You know what <span class="italic">really</span> gets me down,&rdquo; said Salzella, rising to his knees, &ldquo;is the way that in opera everyone takes such a <span class="italic">long</span>!!!!!&hellip;time!!!!!&hellip;to!!!!!&hellip;argh&hellip;argh&hellip;argh&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He keeled over.</p>

<p class="para">The company waited for a while. The audience held its collective breath.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg poked him with a boot. &ldquo;Yep, that&rsquo;s about it. Looks like he&rsquo;s gone down for the last curtain call,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But Walter <span class="italic">didn&rsquo;t</span> stab him!&rdquo; said Agnes. &ldquo;Why won&rsquo;t anyone listen? Look, the sword isn&rsquo;t even <a id="page337"></a>sticking in him! It&rsquo;s just tucked between his body and his arm, for heaven&rsquo;s sake!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;I s&rsquo;pose, really, it&rsquo;s a shame he dint notice that.&rdquo; She scratched at her shoulder. &ldquo;Here, these ballet dresses really tickle&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But he&rsquo;s dead!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Got a bit overexcited, perhaps,&rdquo; said Nanny, fidgeting with a strap.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Overexcited?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Frantic. You know these artistic types. Well, you are one, of course.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He&rsquo;s <span class="italic">really</span> dead?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Seems to be,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;One of the best operatic deaths ever, I wouldn&rsquo;t mind betting.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s terrible!!&rdquo; Bucket grabbed the former Salzella by the collar and hauled him upright. &ldquo;Where&rsquo;s my money? Come on, out with it, tell me what you&rsquo;ve done with my money!!! I don&rsquo;t <span class="italic">hear</span> you!!!! He&rsquo;s not saying anything!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s on account of being dead,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Not talkative, the deceased. As a rule.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, you&rsquo;re a witch!!! Can&rsquo;t you do that thing with the cards and the glasses?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, yes&hellip;we could have a poker game,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Good idea.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The money is in the cellars,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Walter&rsquo;ll show you.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter Plinge clicked his heels. &ldquo;Certainly,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I would be glad to.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket stared. It was Walter Plinge&rsquo;s voice and it was coming out of Walter Plinge&rsquo;s face, but both face and voice were different. Subtly different. The voice had lost the uncertain, frightened edge. The lopsided look had gone from the face.</p>
<a id="page338"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good grief,&rdquo; Bucket murmured, and let go of Salzella&rsquo;s coat. There was a thump.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And since you&rsquo;re going to be needing a new director of music,&rdquo; said Granny, &ldquo;you could do worse than look to Walter here.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Walter?</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He knows everything there is to know about opera,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;And everything about the Opera House, too.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You should see the music he&rsquo;s written&mdash;&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Walter? Musical director?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;stuff you can really hum&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, I think you might be surprised,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;there&rsquo;s one with lots of sailors dancin&rsquo; around singin&rsquo; about how there&rsquo;s no women&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This <span class="italic">is</span> Walter, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;and then some bloke called Les who&rsquo;s miserable all the time&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, this is Walter,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;The same person.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&mdash;and there&rsquo;s one, hah, with all cats all leapin&rsquo; around all singin&rsquo;, that was fun,&rdquo; Nanny burbled. &ldquo;Can&rsquo;t imagine how he thought up that one&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket scratched his chin. He was feeling lightheaded enough as it was.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And he&rsquo;s trustworthy,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;And he&rsquo;s <span class="italic">honest</span>. And he knows all about the Opera House, as I said. And&hellip;where everything is&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">That was enough for Mr. Bucket. &ldquo;Want to be director of music, Walter?&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Thank you, Mr. Bucket,&rdquo; said Walter Plinge. &ldquo;I should like that very much. But what about cleaning the privies?&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page339"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sorry?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I won&rsquo;t have to stop doing them, will I? I&rsquo;ve just got them working right.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh? Right. Really?&rdquo; Mr. Bucket&rsquo;s eyes crossed for a moment. &ldquo;Well, fine. You can sing while you&rsquo;re doing it, if you like,&rdquo; he added generously. &ldquo;And I won&rsquo;t even cut your pay! I&rsquo;ll&hellip;I&rsquo;ll raise it! Six&hellip;no, <span class="italic">seven</span> shiny dollars!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter rubbed his face thoughtfully. &ldquo;Mr. Bucket&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, Walter?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I think&hellip;you paid Mr. Salzella forty shiny dollars&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket turned to Granny. &ldquo;Is he some kind of monster?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You just listen to the stuff he&rsquo;s been writin&rsquo;,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Amazin&rsquo; songs, not even in foreign. Will you just look at this stuff&hellip;&rsquo;scuse me&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She turned her back on the audience&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;twingtwangtwong&mdash;</p>

<p class="para">&mdash;and twirled round again with a wad of music paper in her hands.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I know good music when I sees it,&rdquo; she said, handing it to Bucket and pointing excitedly at extracts. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s got blobs and curly bits all over it, see?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">You</span> have been writing this music?&rdquo; said Bucket to Walter. &ldquo;Which is unaccountably warm?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Indeed, Mr. Bucket.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;In <span class="italic">my</span> time?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a lovely song here,&rdquo; said Nanny, &ldquo;&lsquo;Don&rsquo;t cry for me, Genua.&rsquo; It&rsquo;s very sad. That reminds me, I&rsquo;d better go and see if Mrs. Plinge has come rou&hellip;has woken up. I may have overdone it a bit on the <a id="page340"></a>scumble.&rsquo; She ambled off, twitching at bits of her costume, and nudged a fascinated ballerina. &ldquo;This balleting doesn&rsquo;t half make you sweat, don&rsquo;t you find?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Excuse me, there&rsquo;s something I didn&rsquo;t quite believe,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;. He took Salzella&rsquo;s sword and tested the blade carefully.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ow!&rdquo; he shouted.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Sharp, is it?&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes!&rdquo; Andr&eacute; sucked his thumb. &ldquo;She caught it in her <span class="italic">hand</span>.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She&rsquo;s a witch,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But it was steel! I thought no one could magic steel! Everyone <span class="italic">knows</span> that.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t be too impressed if I was you,&rdquo; said Agnes sourly. &ldquo;It was probably just some kind of trick&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; turned to Granny. &ldquo;Your hand isn&rsquo;t even scratched! How did&hellip;you&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Her stare held him in its sapphire vice for a moment. When he turned away he looked vaguely puzzled, like a man who can&rsquo;t remember where he&rsquo;s just put something down.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I hope he didn&rsquo;t hurt Christine,&rdquo; he mumbled. &ldquo;Why isn&rsquo;t anyone seeing to her?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Probably because she makes sure she screams and faints before anything happens,&rdquo; said Perdita, through Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; set off across the stage. Agnes trailed after him. A couple of dancers were kneeling down next to Christine.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;d be terrible if anything happened to her,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh&hellip;yes.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page341"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Everyone says she&rsquo;s showing such promise&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter stepped up beside him. &ldquo;Yes. We should get her somewhere,&rdquo; he said. His voice was clipped and precise.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes felt the bottom start to drop out of her world. &ldquo;Yes, but&hellip;<span class="italic">you</span> know it was me doing the singing.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes&hellip;yes, of course&hellip;&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;, awkwardly. &ldquo;But&hellip;well&hellip;this is opera&hellip;you know&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Walter took her hand.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But it was <span class="italic">me</span> you taught!&rdquo; she said desperately.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then you were <span class="italic">very</span> good,&rdquo; said Walter. &ldquo;I suspect she will never be quite that good, even with many months of my tuition. But, Perdita, have you ever heard of the words &lsquo;star quality&rsquo;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Is it the same as <span class="italic">talent</span>?&rdquo; snapped Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It is rarer.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She stared at him. His face, however it was controlled now, was quite handsome in the glare of the footlights.</p>

<p class="para">She pulled her hand free. &ldquo;I liked you better when you were Walter Plinge,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes turned away, and felt Granny Weatherwax&rsquo;s gaze on her. She was sure it was a mocking gaze.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;we ought to get Christine into Mr. Bucket&rsquo;s office,&rdquo; Andr&eacute; said.</p>

<p class="para">This seemed to break some sort of spell.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed!!!&rdquo; said Bucket. &ldquo;And we can&rsquo;t leave Mr. Salzella corpsing onstage, either. You two, you&rsquo;d better take him backstage. The rest of you&hellip;well, it was nearly over anyway&hellip;er&hellip;that&rsquo;s it. The&hellip;opera is over&hellip;&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page342"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Walter Plinge!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny Ogg entered, supporting Mrs. Plinge. Walter&rsquo;s mother fixed him with a beady gaze. &ldquo;Have you been a bad boy?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Mr. Bucket walked over to her and patted her hand. &ldquo;I think you&rsquo;d better come along to my office, too,&rdquo; he said. He handed the sheaf of music to Andr&eacute;, who opened it at random.</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; gave it a glance, and then stared. &ldquo;Hey&hellip;this is <span class="italic">good</span>,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; looked at another page. &ldquo;Good heavens!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What? What?&rdquo; said Bucket.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve just never&hellip;I mean, even I can see&hellip;tum-ti TUM tum-tum&hellip;yes&hellip;Mr. Bucket, you do know this isn&rsquo;t opera? There&rsquo;s music and&hellip;yes&hellip;dancing and singing all right, but it&rsquo;s not opera. Not opera at all. A long way from opera.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How far? You don&rsquo;t mean&hellip;&rdquo; Bucket hesitated, savoring the idea, &ldquo;you don&rsquo;t mean that it&rsquo;s just possible that you put music <span class="italic">in</span> and you get money <span class="italic">out</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Andr&eacute; hummed a few bars. &ldquo;This could very well be the case, Mr. Bucket.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Bucket beamed. He put one arm around Andr&eacute; and the other around Walter. &ldquo;Good!!!!!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This calls for a very lar&hellip;for a medium-sized drink!!!!!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">One by one, or in groups, the singers and dancers left the stage. And the witches and Agnes were left alone.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Is that <span class="italic">it</span>?&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not quite yet,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">Someone staggered onto the stage. A kindly <a id="page343"></a>hand had bandaged Enrico Basilica&rsquo;s head, and presumably another kindly hand had given him the plate of spaghetti he was holding. Mild concussion still seemed to have him in its grip. He blinked at the witches and then spoke like a man who&rsquo;d lost his hold on immediate events and so was clinging hard to more ancient considerations.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Summon give me some &rsquo;ghetti,&rdquo; he said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s nice,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Hah! &rsquo;Ghetti is fine for them as likes it&hellip;but not me! Hah! Yes!&rdquo; He turned and peered muzzily at the darkness of the audience.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You know what I&rsquo;m goin&rsquo; to do? You know what I&rsquo;m goin&rsquo; to do now? I&rsquo;m sayin&rsquo; goodbye to Enrico Basilica! Oh yes! He&rsquo;s chewed his last tentacle! I&rsquo;m goin&rsquo; to go right out now and have eight pints of Turbot&rsquo;s Really Odd. Yes! And probably a sausage ina bun! And then I&rsquo;m goin&rsquo; down to the music hall to hear Nellie Stamp sing &lsquo;A Winkle&rsquo;s No Use if You Don&rsquo;t Have a Pin&rsquo;&mdash;and if I sing again here it&rsquo;s goin&rsquo; to be under the proud old name of Henry Slugg, do you hear&mdash;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a shriek from somewhere in the audience. &ldquo;Henry Slugg?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Er&hellip;yes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I <span class="italic">thought</span> it was you! You&rsquo;ve grown a beard and stuffed a haystack down your trousers but, I thought, under that little mask, that&rsquo;s my Henry, that was!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Henry Slugg shaded his eyes from the footlights&rsquo; glare.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;Angeline?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, no!&rdquo; said Agnes, wearily. &ldquo;This sort of thing <span class="italic">does not</span> happen.&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page344"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Happens in the theater all the time,&rdquo; said Nanny Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It certainly does,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only a mercy he doesn&rsquo;t have a long-lost twin brother.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was the sound of much scuffling in the audience. Someone was climbing along a row, dragging someone else.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mother!&rdquo; came a voice from the gloom. &ldquo;What do you think you are doing?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You just come with me, young Henry!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mother, we can&rsquo;t go up on the stage&hellip;!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Henry Slugg frisbeed the plate into the wings, clambered down from the stage and heaved himself over the edge of the orchestra pit, assisted by a couple of violinists.</p>

<p class="para">They met at the first row of seats. Agnes could just hear their voices.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I <span class="italic">meant</span> to come back. You know that!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I wanted to wait but, what with one thing and another&hellip;especially one thing. Come here, young Henry&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Mother, <span class="italic">what</span> is happening?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Son&hellip;you know I always said your father was Mr. Lawsy the eel juggler?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, of&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Please, both of you, come back to my dressing room! I can see we&rsquo;ve got such a lot to talk about.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, yes. A lot&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes watched them go. The audience, who could spot opera even if it wasn&rsquo;t being sung, applauded.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And <span class="italic">now</span> is it the end?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Nearly,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Did you do something to everyone&rsquo;s heads?&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page345"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No, but I felt like smacking a few,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But no one said &lsquo;thank you&rsquo; or anything!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Often the case,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Too busy thinking about the next performance,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;The show must go on,&rdquo; she added.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s&hellip;that&rsquo;s madness!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s opera. I noticed that even Mr. Bucket&rsquo;s caught it, too,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;And that young Andr&eacute; has been rescued from being a policeman, if I&rsquo;m any judge.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But what about <span class="italic">me</span>?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, them as <span class="italic">makes</span> the endings don&rsquo;t <span class="italic">get</span> them,&rdquo; said Granny. She brushed an invisible speck of dust off her shoulder.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I expect we&rsquo;d better be gettin&rsquo; along, Gytha,&rdquo; she said, turning her back on Agnes. &ldquo;Early start tomorrow.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny walked forward, shading her eyes as she stared out into the dark maw of the auditorium.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;The audience haven&rsquo;t gone, you know,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re still sitting out there.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny joined her, and peered into the gloom. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t imagine why,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;He did <span class="italic">say</span> the opera&rsquo;s over&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">They turned and looked at Agnes, who was standing in the center of the stage and glowering at nothing.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Feeling a bit angry?&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Only to be expected.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Feeling that everything&rsquo;s happened for other people and not for you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Yes!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But,&rdquo; said Granny Weatherwax, &ldquo;look at it like <a id="page346"></a>this: what&rsquo;s Christine got to look forward to? She&rsquo;ll just become a singer. Stuck in a little world. Oh, maybe she&rsquo;ll be good enough to get a little fame, but one day the voice&rsquo;ll crack and that&rsquo;s the end of her life. <span class="italic">You</span> have got a choice. You can either be on the stage, just a performer, just going through the lines&hellip;or you can be outside it, and know how the script works, where the scenery hangs, and where the trapdoors are. Isn&rsquo;t that better?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">No!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The infuriating thing about Nanny Ogg and Granny Weatherwax, Agnes thought later, was the way they sometimes acted in tandem, without exchanging a word. Of course, there were plenty of other things&mdash;the way they never thought that meddling was meddling if <span class="italic">they</span> did it; the way they automatically assumed that everyone else&rsquo;s business was their own; the way they went through life in a straight line; the way, in fact, that they arrived in any situation and immediately started to change it. Compared to that, acting on unspoken agreement was a mere minor annoyance, but it was here and up close.</p>

<p class="para">They walked toward her, and each laid a hand on her shoulder.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Feeling <span class="italic">angry</span>?&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">Yes!</span>&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I should let it out then, if I was you,&rdquo; said Nanny.</p>

<p class="para">Agnes shut her eyes, clenched her fists, opened her mouth and screamed.</p>

<p class="para">It started low. Plaster dust drifted down from the ceiling. The prisms on the chandelier chimed gently as they shook.</p>
<a id="page347"></a>

<p class="para">It rose, passing quickly through the mysterious pitch at fourteen cycles per second where the human spirit begins to feel distinctly uncomfortable about the universe and the place in it of the bowels. Small items around the Opera House vibrated off shelves and smashed on the floor.</p>

<p class="para">The note climbed, rang like a bell, climbed again. In the Pit, all the violin strings snapped, one by one.</p>

<p class="para">As the tone rose, the crystal prisms shook in the chandelier. In the bar, champagne corks fired a salvo. Ice jingled and shattered in its bucket. A line of wineglasses joined in the chorus, blurred around the rims, and then exploded like hazardous thistle down with attitude.</p>

<p class="para">There were harmonics and echoes that caused strange effects. In the dressing rooms the No. 3 greasepaint melted. Mirrors cracked, filling the ballet school with a million fractured images.</p>

<p class="para">Dust rose, insects fell. In the stones of the Opera House tiny particles of quartz danced briefly&hellip;</p>

<p class="para">Then there was silence, broken by the occasional thud and tinkle.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny grinned.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;<span class="italic">Now</span> the opera&rsquo;s over.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Salzella opened his eyes.</p>

<p class="para">The stage was empty, and dark, and nevertheless brilliantly lit. That is, a huge shadowless light was streaming from some unseen source and yet, apart from Salzella himself, there was nothing for it to illuminate.</p>

<p class="para">Footsteps sounded in the distance. Their owner took some time to arrive, but when he stepped into <a id="page348"></a>the liquid air around Salzella he seemed to burst into flame.</p>

<p class="para">He wore red: a red suit with red lace, a red cloak, red shoes with ruby buckles, and a broad-brimmed red hat with a huge red feather. He even walked with a long red stick, bedecked with red ribbons. But for someone who had taken such meticulous trouble with his costume, he&rsquo;d been remiss in the matter of his mask. It was a crude one of a skull, such as might be bought in any theatrical shop&mdash;Salzella could even see the string.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where did everyone go?&rdquo; Salzella demanded. Unpleasant recent memories were beginning to bubble up in his mind. He couldn&rsquo;t quite recall them clearly at the moment, but the taste of them was bad.</p>

<p class="para">The figure said nothing.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Where&rsquo;s the orchestra? What happened to the audience?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a barely perceptible shrug from the tall red figure.</p>

<p class="para">Salzella began to notice other details. What he had thought was the stage seemed slightly gritty underfoot. The ceiling above him was a long way away, perhaps as far away as anything could be, and was filled with cold, hard points of light.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I asked you a question!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">T<span class="smallCaps">HREE QUESTIONS, IN FACT</span>.</p>

<p class="para">The words turned up on the inside of Salzella&rsquo;s ears with no suggestion that they had had to travel like normal sound.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You didn&rsquo;t answer me!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">S<span class="smallCaps">OME THINGS YOU HAVE TO WORK OUT FOR YOURSELF, AND THIS IS ONE OF THEM, BELIEVE ME</span>.</p>
<a id="page349"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Who <span class="italic">are</span> you? You&rsquo;re not a member of the cast, I know that! Take off that mask!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">A<span class="smallCaps">S YOU WISH</span>. I <span class="smallCaps">DO LIKE TO GET INTO THE SPIRIT OF THE THING</span>.</p>

<p class="para">The figure removed its mask.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And now take off that other mask!&rdquo; said Salzella, as the frozen fingers of dread rose through him.</p>

<p class="para">Death touched a secret spring on the stick. A blade shot out, so thin that it was transparent, its edge glittering blue as air molecules were sliced into their component atoms.</p>

<p class="para">A<span class="smallCaps">H</span>, he said, raising the scythe. T<span class="smallCaps">HERE</span> I <span class="smallCaps">THINK YOU HAVE ME</span>.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">It was dark in the cellars, but Nanny Ogg had walked alone in the strange caverns under Lancre and through the nighttime forests with Granny Weatherwax. Darkness held no fears for an Ogg.</p>

<p class="para">She struck a match.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Greebo?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">People had been tramping to and fro for hours. The darkness wasn&rsquo;t private anymore. It had taken quite a lot of people to carry all the money, for a start. Up until the end of the opera, there <span class="italic">had</span> been something mysterious about these cellars. Now they were just&hellip;well&hellip;damp underground rooms. Something that had lived here had moved on.</p>

<p class="para">Her foot rattled a piece of pottery.</p>

<p class="para">She grunted as she went down on one knee. Spilled mud and shards of broken pot littered the floor. Here and there, unrooted and snapped, were some unheeded pieces of dead twig.</p>

<p class="para">Only some kind of fool would have stuck bits of <a id="page350"></a>wood in pots of mud far underground and expected anything to happen.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny picked one up and sniffed it tentatively. It smelled of mud. And nothing else.</p>

<p class="para">She&rsquo;d have liked to have known how it had been done. Just professional interest, of course. And she knew she never would, now. Walter was a busy man now, up in the light. And, for something to begin, other things had to end.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We all wears a mask of one sort or another,&rdquo; she said to the damp air. &ldquo;No sense in upsetting things now, eh&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The coach didn&rsquo;t leave until seven o&rsquo;clock in the morning. By Lancre standards that was practically midday. The witches got there early.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I was hoping to shop for a few souvenirs,&rdquo; said Nanny, stamping her feet on the cobbles to keep warm. &ldquo;For the kiddies.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;No time,&rdquo; said Granny Weatherwax.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not that it would have made any difference on account of me not having any money to buy &rsquo;em with,&rdquo; Nanny went on.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not my fault if you fritter your money away,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t recall having a single chance to frit.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Money&rsquo;s only useful for the things it can do.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well, yes. I could&rsquo;ve done with having some new boots, for a start.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny jiggled up and down a bit, and whistled around her tooth.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Nice of Mrs. Palm to let us stay there gratis,&rdquo; she said.</p>
<a id="page351"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;O&rsquo; course, I helped out playin&rsquo; the piano and tellin&rsquo; jokes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;An added bonus,&rdquo; said Granny, nodding.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;An&rsquo; of course there was all those little nibbles I prepared. With the Special Party Dip.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes indeed,&rdquo; said Granny, poker-faced. &ldquo;Mrs. Palm was saying only this morning that she&rsquo;s thinking of retiring next year.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny looked up and down the street again.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I &rsquo;spect young Agnes&rsquo;ll be turning up any minute now,&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I really couldn&rsquo;t say,&rdquo; said Granny haughtily.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not as though there&rsquo;s much for her here, after all.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny sniffed. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s up to her, I&rsquo;m sure.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Everyone was very impressed, I reckon, when you caught that sword in your hand&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny sighed. &ldquo;Hah! Yes, I expect they were. They didn&rsquo;t think clearly, did they? People&rsquo;re just lazy. They never think: maybe she had something in her hand, a bit of metal or something. They don&rsquo;t think for a minute it was just a trick. They don&rsquo;t think there&rsquo;s always a perfectly good explanation if you look for it. They probably think it was some kind of magic.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yeah, but&hellip;you <span class="italic">didn&rsquo;t</span> have anything in your hand, did you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s not the point. I <span class="italic">might</span> have done.&rdquo; Granny looked up and down the square. &ldquo;Besides, you can&rsquo;t magic iron.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;That&rsquo;s very true. Not iron. Now, someone like ole Black Aliss, they could make their skin tougher than steel&hellip;but that&rsquo;s just an ole legend, I expect&hellip;&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page352"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;She could do it all right,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;But you can&rsquo;t go round messin&rsquo; with cause and effect. That&rsquo;s what sent her mad, come the finish. She thought she could put herself outside of things like cause and effect. Well, you can&rsquo;t. You grab a sharp sword by the blade, you get hurt. World&rsquo;d be a terrible place if people forgot that.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;<span class="italic">You</span> weren&rsquo;t hurt.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Not my fault. I didn&rsquo;t have time.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny blew on her hands. &ldquo;One good thing, though,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a blessing the chandelier never came down. I was worried about that soon as I saw it. Looks too dramatic for its own good, I thought. First thing I&rsquo;d smash, if I was a loony.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Haven&rsquo;t been able to find Greebo since last night.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Good.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;He always turns up, though.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Unfortunately.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was a clatter as the coach swung around the corner.</p>

<p class="para">It stopped.</p>

<p class="para">Then the coachman tugged on the reins and it did a U-turn and disappeared again.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Esme?&rdquo; said Nanny, after a while.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a man and two horses peering at us around the corner.&rdquo; She raised her voice. &ldquo;Come on, I know you&rsquo;re there! Seven o&rsquo;clock, this coach is supposed to leave! Did you get the tickets, Esme?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Me?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; said Nanny uncertainly. &ldquo;So&hellip;we haven&rsquo;t got eighty dollars for the tickets, then?&rdquo;</p>
<a id="page353"></a>

<p class="para">&ldquo;What&rsquo;ve you got stuffed up your elastic?&rdquo; said Granny as the coach advanced cautiously.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Nothin&rsquo; that is legal tender for travelin&rsquo; purposes, I fear.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Then&hellip;no, we can&rsquo;t afford tickets.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny sighed. &ldquo;Oh, well, I&rsquo;ll just have to use charm.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s going to be a long walk,&rdquo; said Granny.</p>

<p class="para">The coach pulled up. Nanny looked up at the driver, and smiled innocently. &ldquo;Good morning, my good sir!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">He gave her a slightly frightened but mainly suspicious look. &ldquo;Is it?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We are desirous of traveling to Lancre but unfortunately we find ourselves a bit embarrassed in the knicker department.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You are?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;But we are witches and could prob&rsquo;ly pay for our travel by, e.g., curing any embarrassing little ailments you may have.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The coachman frowned. &ldquo;I ain&rsquo;t carrying you for nothing, old crone. And I haven&rsquo;t got any embarrassing little ailments!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny stepped forward.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;How many would you like?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">Rain rolled over the plains. It wasn&rsquo;t an impressive Ramtops thunderstorm but a lazy, persistent, low-cloud rain, like a fat fog. It had been following them all day.</p>

<p class="para">The witches had the coach to themselves. Several people had opened the door while it had been waiting to leave, but for some reason had sud<a id="page354"></a>denly decided that today&rsquo;s travel plans didn&rsquo;t include a coach ride.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Making good time,&rdquo; said Nanny, opening the curtains and peering out of the window.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I expect the driver&rsquo;s in a hurry.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, I &rsquo;spect he is.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Shut the window, though. It&rsquo;s getting wet in here.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Righty-ho.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Nanny grabbed the strap and then suddenly poked her head out into the rain.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Stop! Stop! Tell the man to stop!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The coach slewed to a halt in a sheet of mud.</p>

<p class="para">Nanny threw open the door. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know, trying to walk home, and in this weather, too! You&rsquo;ll catch your death!&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Rain and fog rolled in through the open doorway. Then a bedraggled shape pulled itself over the sill and slunk under the seats, leaving small puddles behind it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Tryin&rsquo; to be independent,&rdquo; said Nanny. &ldquo;Bless &rsquo;im.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">The coach got under way again. Granny stared out at the endless darkening fields and the relentless drizzle, and saw another figure toiling along in the mud by the road that would, eventually, reach Lancre. As the coach swept past, it drenched the walker in thin slurry.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, indeed. Being independent&rsquo;s a fine ambition,&rdquo; she said, drawing the curtains.</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The trees were bare when Granny Weatherwax got back to her cottage.</p>
<a id="page355"></a>

<p class="para">Twigs and seeds had blown in under the door. Soot had fallen down the chimney. Her home, always somewhat organic, had grown a little closer to its roots in the clay.</p>

<p class="para">There were things to do, so she did them. There were leaves to be swept, and the woodpile to be built up under the eaves. The wind sock behind the beehives, tattered by autumn storms, needed to be darned. Hay had to be got in for the goats. Apples had to be stored in the loft. The walls could do with another coat of whitewash.</p>

<p class="para">But there was something that had to be done first. It&rsquo;d make the other jobs a bit more difficult, but there was no help for that. You couldn&rsquo;t magic iron. And you couldn&rsquo;t grab a sword without being hurt. If that wasn&rsquo;t true, the world&rsquo;d be all over the place.</p>

<p class="para">Granny made herself some tea, and then boiled up the kettle again. She took a handful of herbs out of a box on the dresser, and dropped them in a bowl with the steaming water. She took a length of clean bandage out of a drawer and set it carefully on the table beside the bowl. She threaded an extremely sharp needle and laid needle and thread beside the bandage. She scooped a fingerful of greenish ointment out of a small tin, and smeared it on a square of lint.</p>

<p class="para">That seemed to be it.</p>

<p class="para">She sat down, and rested her arm on the table, palm-up.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Well,&rdquo; she said, to no one in particular, &ldquo;I reckon I&rsquo;ve got time now.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>
<a id="page356"></a>

<p class="paraNoIndent">The privy had to be moved. It was a job Granny preferred to do for herself. There was something incredibly satisfying in digging a very deep hole. It was <span class="italic">uncomplicated</span>. You knew where you were with a hole in the ground. Dirt didn&rsquo;t get strange ideas, or believe that people were honest because they had a steady gaze and a firm handshake. It just lay there, waiting for you to move it. And, after you&rsquo;d done it, you could sit there in the lovely warm knowledge that it&rsquo;d be months before you had to do it again.</p>

<p class="para">It was while she was at the bottom of the hole that a shadow fell across it.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Afternoon, Perdita,&rdquo; she said without looking up.</p>

<p class="para">She lifted another shovelful to head-height and flung it over the edge.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Come home for a visit, have you?&rdquo; she said.</p>

<p class="para">She rammed the shovel into the clay at the bottom of the hole again, winced, and forced it down with her foot.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Thought you were doing very well in the opera,&rdquo; she went on. &ldquo;&rsquo;Course, I&rsquo;m not an expert in these things. Good to see young people seeking their fortune in the big city, though.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She looked up with a bright, friendly smile.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I see you&rsquo;ve lost a bit of weight, too.&rdquo; Innocence hung from her words like loops of toffee.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been&hellip;taking exercise,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Exercise is a fine thing, certainly,&rdquo; said Granny, getting back to her digging. &ldquo;Though they do say you can have too much of it. When are you going back?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I&hellip;haven&rsquo;t decided.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Weeelll, it doesn&rsquo;t pay to be always planning. <a id="page357"></a>Don&rsquo;t tie yourself down the whole time, I&rsquo;ve always said that. Staying with your ma, are you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Agnes.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Ah? Only Magrat&rsquo;s old cottage is still empty. You&rsquo;d be doing everyone a favor if you aired it out a bit. You know&hellip;as long as you&rsquo;re here.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes said nothing. She couldn&rsquo;t think of anything to say.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Funny ole thing,&rdquo; said Granny, hacking around a particularly troublesome tree root. &ldquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t tell everyone, but I was only thinking the other day, about when I was younger and called myself Endemonidia&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;You <span class="italic">did</span>? When?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny rubbed her forehead with her bandaged hand, leaving a clay-red smudge.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Oh, for about three, four hours,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Some names don&rsquo;t have the stayin&rsquo; power. Never pick yourself a name you can&rsquo;t scrub the floor in.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She threw her shovel out of the hole. &ldquo;Give me a hand up, will you?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes did so. Granny brushed the dirt and leaf mold off her apron and tried to stamp the clay off her boots.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Time for a cup of tea, eh?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;My, you <span class="italic">are</span> looking well. It&rsquo;s the fresh air. Too much stuffy air in that Opera House, I thought.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes tried in vain to detect anything in Granny Weatherwax&rsquo;s eyes other than transparent honesty and goodwill.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes. I thought so, too,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Er&hellip;you&rsquo;ve hurt your hand?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;It&rsquo;ll heal. A lot of things do.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">She shouldered her shovel and headed toward <a id="page358"></a>the cottage; and then, halfway up the path, turned and looked back.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;This is just me askin&rsquo;, you understand, in a kind neighborly way, takin&rsquo; an interest sort of thing, wouldn&rsquo;t be human if I didn&rsquo;t&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Agnes sighed. &ldquo;Yes?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;&hellip;you got much to do with your evenin&rsquo;s these days?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">There was just enough rebellion left in Agnes to put a sarcastic edge on her voice. &ldquo;Oh? Are you offering to teach me something?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Teach? No,&rdquo; said Granny. &ldquo;Ain&rsquo;t got the patience for teaching. But I might let you learn.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="spaceBreak">&nbsp;</p>

<p class="paraNoIndent">&ldquo;When shall we three meet again?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We haven&rsquo;t met <span class="italic">once</span>, yet.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;O&rsquo; course we have. I&rsquo;ve person&rsquo;ly known you for at least&mdash;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;I mean we <span class="italic">Three</span> haven&rsquo;t <span class="italic">Met</span>. You know&hellip;officially&hellip;&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right&hellip;When shall we three meet?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;We&rsquo;re already here.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;All right. When shall&mdash;?&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Just shut up and get out the marshmallows. Agnes, give Nanny the marshmallows.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Yes, Granny.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;And mind you don&rsquo;t burn mine.&rdquo;</p>

<p class="para">Granny sat back. It was a clear night, although clouds mounting toward the hub promised snow soon. A few sparks flew up toward the stars. She looked around proudly.</p>

<p class="para">&ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t this <span class="italic">nice</span>,&rdquo; she said.</p>



</div>
</body>
</html>
