<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:ops="http://www.w3.org/2007/ops" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xml:lang="en">

<head>
<link href="pdlmsr.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet"/>
<title>Foot Note</title>
</head>
<body>
<div>
<p class="footnote" id="ft1"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin.xhtml#ft_1">*</a> The people of Lancre thought that marriage was a very serious step that ought to be done properly, so they practiced quite a lot.</span></p>
<p class="footnote" id="ft2"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin.xhtml#ft_2">*</a> Not that she sat looking out of the window. She&rsquo;d been watching the fire when she picked up the approach of Jarge Weaver. But that wasn&rsquo;t the <span class="italic">point</span>.</span></p>
<p class="footnote" id="ft3"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin.xhtml#ft_3">*</a> Or, at least, dying for chocolate.</span></p>
<p class="footnote" id="ft4"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin.xhtml#ft_4">*</a> Er. That is to say, they went to bed at the same time as the chickens went to bed. and got up at the same time as the cows got up. Loosely worded sayings can really cause misunderstandings.</span></p>
<p class="footnote" id="ft5"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin1.xhtml#ft_5">*</a> Distillation of alcohol was illegal in Lancre. On the other hand, King Verence had long ago given up any idea of stopping a witch doing something she wanted to do, so merely required Nanny Ogg to keep her still somewhere it wasn&rsquo;t obvious. She thoroughly approved of the prohibition, since this gave her an unchallenged market for her own product, known wherever men fell backward into a ditch as &ldquo;suicider.&rdquo;</span></p>
<p class="footnote" id="ft6"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin1.xhtml#ft_6">*</a> Strictly speaking, this means being chased by photographers anxious to get a picture of you with your vest off.</span></p>
<p class="footnote" id="ft7"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin1.xhtml#ft_7">*</a> Without regret, since she hadn&rsquo;t found any use for it.</span></p>
<p class="footnote" id="ft8"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin2.xhtml#ft_8">*</a> Bergholt Stuttley (&ldquo;Bloody Stupid&rdquo;) Johnson was Ankh-Morpork&rsquo;s most famous, or rather most notorious, inventor. He was renowned for never letting his number blindness, his lack of any skill whatsoever or his complete failure to grasp the essence of a problem stand in the way of his cheerful progress as the first Counter-Renaissance man. Shortly after building the famous Collapsed Tower of Quirm he turned his attention to the world of music, particularly large organs and mechanical orchestras. Examples of his handiwork still occasionally come to light in sales, auctions, and quite frequently, wreckage.</span></p>
<p class="footnote" id="ft9"><span class="footnotePara"><a href="begin2.xhtml#ft_9">*</a> It was central to Nanny Ogg&rsquo;s soul that she never considered herself an old woman, while of course availing herself of every advantage that other people&rsquo;s perceptions of her as such would bring.</span></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
